In the Country of the Gillikins, which is at the North of the Land of
Oz, lived a youth called Tip. There was more to his name than that, for
old Mombi often declared that his whole name was Tippetarius; but no
one was expected to say such a long word when "Tip" would do just as
well.

This boy remembered nothing of his parents, for he had been brought
when quite young to be reared by the old woman known as Mombi, whose
reputation, I am sorry to say, was none of the best. For the Gillikin
people had reason to suspect her of indulging in magical arts, and
therefore hesitated to associate with her.

Mombi was not exactly a Witch, because the Good Witch who ruled that
part of the Land of Oz had forbidden any other Witch to exist in her
dominions. So Tip's guardian, however much she might aspire to working
magic, realized it was unlawful to be more than a Sorceress, or at most
a Wizardess.

[Illustration]

Tip was made to carry wood from the forest, that the old woman might
boil her pot. He also worked in the corn-fields, hoeing and husking;
and he fed the pigs and milked the four-horned cow that was Mombi's
especial pride.

But you must not suppose he worked all the time, for he felt that
would be bad for him. When sent to the forest Tip often climbed trees
for birds' eggs or amused himself chasing the fleet white rabbits or
fishing in the brooks with bent pins. Then he would hastily gather
his armful of wood and carry it home. And when he was supposed to be
working in the corn-fields, and the tall stalks hid him from Mombi's
view, Tip would often dig in the gopher holes, or--if the mood seized
him--lie upon his back between the rows of corn and take a nap. So, by
taking care not to exhaust his strength, he grew as strong and rugged
as a boy may be.

Mombi's curious magic often frightened her neighbors, and they treated
her shyly, yet respectfully, because of her weird powers. But Tip
frankly hated her, and took no pains to hide his feelings. Indeed, he
sometimes showed less respect for the old woman than he should have
done, considering she was his guardian.

[Illustration]

There were pumpkins in Mombi's corn-fields, lying golden red among the
rows of green stalks; and these had been planted and carefully tended
that the four-horned cow might eat of them in the winter time. But one
day, after the corn had all been cut and stacked, and Tip was carrying
the pumpkins to the stable, he took a notion to make a "Jack Lantern"
and try to give the old woman a fright with it.

So he selected a fine, big pumpkin--one with a lustrous, orange-red
color--and began carving it. With the point of his knife he made two
round eyes, a three-cornered nose, and a mouth shaped like a new moon.
The face, when completed, could not have been considered strictly
beautiful; but it wore a smile so big and broad, and was so jolly in
expression, that even Tip laughed as he looked admiringly at his work.

The child had no playmates, so he did not know that boys often dig
out the inside of a "pumpkin-jack," and in the space thus made put a
lighted candle to render the face more startling; but he conceived an
idea of his own that promised to be quite as effective. He decided to
manufacture the form of a man, who would wear this pumpkin head, and to
stand it in a place where old Mombi would meet it face to face.

"And then," said Tip to himself, with a laugh, "she'll squeal louder
than the brown pig does when I pull her tail, and shiver with fright
worse than I did last year when I had the ague!"

He had plenty of time to accomplish this task, for Mombi had gone to a
village--to buy groceries, she said--and it was a journey of at least
two days.

So he took his axe to the forest, and selected some stout, straight
saplings, which he cut down and trimmed of all their twigs and leaves.
From these he would make the arms, and legs, and feet of his man. For
the body he stripped a sheet of thick bark from around a big tree, and
with much labor fashioned it into a cylinder of about the right size,
pinning the edges together with wooden pegs. Then, whistling happily as
he worked, he carefully jointed the limbs and fastened them to the body
with pegs whittled into shape with his knife.

By the time this feat had been accomplished it began to grow dark, and
Tip remembered he must milk the cow and feed the pigs. So he picked up
his wooden man and carried it back to the house with him.

During the evening, by the light of the fire in the kitchen, Tip
carefully rounded all the edges of the joints and smoothed the rough
places in a neat and workmanlike manner. Then he stood the figure up
against the wall and admired it. It seemed remarkably tall, even for a
full-grown man; but that was a good point in a small boy's eyes, and
Tip did not object at all to the size of his creation.

Next morning, when he looked at his work again, Tip saw he had
forgotten to give the dummy a neck, by means of which he might fasten
the pumpkinhead to the body. So he went again to the forest, which was
not far away, and chopped from a tree several pieces of wood with which
to complete his work. When he returned he fastened a cross-piece to
the upper end of the body, making a hole through the center to hold
upright the neck. The bit of wood which formed this neck was also
sharpened at the upper end, and when all was ready Tip put on the
pumpkin head, pressing it well down onto the neck, and found that it
fitted very well. The head could be turned to one side or the other, as
he pleased, and the hinges of the arms and legs allowed him to place
the dummy in any position he desired.

"Now, that," declared Tip, proudly, "is really a very fine man, and it
ought to frighten several screeches out of old Mombi! But it would be
much more lifelike if it were properly dressed."

To find clothing seemed no easy task; but Tip boldly ransacked the
great chest in which Mombi kept all her keepsakes and treasures, and
at the very bottom he discovered some purple trousers, a red shirt
and a pink vest which was dotted with white spots. These he carried
away to his man and succeeded, although the garments did not fit very
well, in dressing the creature in a jaunty fashion. Some knit stockings
belonging to Mombi and a much worn pair of his own shoes completed the
man's apparel, and Tip was so delighted that he danced up and down and
laughed aloud in boyish ecstasy.

"I must give him a name!" he cried. "So good a man as this must surely
have a name. I believe," he added, after a moment's thought, "I will
name the fellow 'Jack Pumpkinhead!'"

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    The Marvelous
    Powder of Life
]


After considering the matter carefully, Tip decided that the best
place to locate Jack would be at the bend in the road, a little way
from the house. So he started to carry his man there, but found him
heavy and rather awkward to handle. After dragging the creature a short
distance Tip stood him on his feet, and by first bending the joints of
one leg, and then those of the other,--at the same time pushing from
behind,--the boy managed to induce Jack to walk to the bend in the
road. It was not accomplished without a few tumbles, and Tip really
worked harder than he ever had in the fields or forest; but a love of
mischief urged him on, and it pleased him to test the cleverness of his
workmanship.

"Jack's all right, and works fine!" he said to himself, panting with
the unusual exertion. But just then he discovered the man's left
arm had fallen off in the journey; so he went back to find it, and
afterward, by whittling a new and stouter pin for the shoulder-joint,
he repaired the injury so successfully that the arm was stronger than
before. Tip also noticed that Jack's pumpkin head had twisted around
until it faced his back; but this was easily remedied. When, at last,
the man was set up facing the turn in the path where old Mombi was to
appear, he looked natural enough to be a fair imitation of a Gillikin
farmer,--and unnatural enough to startle anyone that came on him
unawares.

As it was yet too early in the day to expect the old woman to return
home, Tip went down into the valley below the farm-house and began to
gather nuts from the trees that grew there.

However, old Mombi returned earlier than usual. She had met a crooked
wizard who resided in a lonely cave in the mountains, and had traded
several important secrets of magic with him. Having in this way
secured three new recipes, four magical powders and a selection of
herbs of wonderful power and potency, she hobbled home as fast as she
could, in order to test her new sorceries.

So intent was Mombi on the treasures she had gained that when she
turned the bend in the road and caught a glimpse of the man, she merely
nodded and said:

"Good evening, sir."

But, a moment after, noting that the person did not move or reply,
she cast a shrewd glance into his face and discovered his pumpkin
head--elaborately carved by Tip's jack-knife.

"Heh!" ejaculated Mombi, giving a sort of grunt; "that rascally boy
has been playing tricks again! Very good! ve--ry _good_! I'll beat him
black-and-blue for trying to scare me in this fashion!"

Angrily she raised her stick to smash in the grinning pumpkin head of
the dummy; but a sudden thought made her pause, the uplifted stick left
motionless in the air.

"Why, here is a good chance to try my new powder!" said she, eagerly.
"And then I can tell whether that crooked wizard has fairly traded
secrets, or whether he has fooled me as wickedly as I fooled him."

So she set down her basket and began fumbling in it for one of the
precious powders she had obtained.

While Mombi was thus occupied Tip strolled back, with his pockets full
of nuts, and discovered the old woman standing beside his man and
apparently not the least bit frightened by it.

At first he was greatly disappointed; but the next moment he became
curious to know what Mombi was going to do. So he hid behind a hedge,
where he could see without being seen, and prepared to watch.

After some search the woman drew from her basket an old pepper-box,
upon the faded label of which the wizard had written with a
lead-pencil: "Powder of Life."

"Ah--here it is!" she cried, joyfully. "And now let us see if it is
potent. The stingy wizard didn't give me much of it, but I guess
there's enough for two or three doses."

[Illustration: "OLD MOMBI DANCED AROUND HIM"]

Tip was much surprised when he overheard this speech. Then he saw old
Mombi raise her arm and sprinkle the powder from the box over the
pumpkin head of his man Jack. She did this in the same way one would
pepper a baked potato, and the powder sifted down from Jack's head and
scattered over the red shirt and pink waistcoat and purple trousers
Tip had dressed him in, and a portion even fell upon the patched and
worn shoes.

Then, putting the pepper-box back into the basket, Mombi lifted her
left hand, with its little finger pointed upward, and said:

"Weaugh!"

Then she lifted her right hand, with the thumb pointed upward, and said:

"Teaugh!"

Then she lifted both hands, with all the fingers and thumbs spread out,
and cried:

"Peaugh!"

Jack Pumpkinhead stepped back a pace, at this, and said in a
reproachful voice:

"Don't yell like that! Do you think I'm deaf?"

Old Mombi danced around him, frantic with delight.

"He lives!" she screamed: "he lives! he lives!"

Then she threw her stick into the air and caught it as it came down;
and she hugged herself with both arms, and tried to do a step of a jig;
and all the time she repeated, rapturously:

"He lives!--he lives!--he lives!"

Now you may well suppose that Tip observed all this with amazement.

At first he was so frightened and horrified that he wanted to run
away, but his legs trembled and shook so badly that he couldn't.
Then it struck him as a very funny thing for Jack to come to life,
especially as the expression on his pumpkin face was so droll and
comical it excited laughter on the instant. So, recovering from his
first fear, Tip began to laugh; and the merry peals reached old Mombi's
ears and made her hobble quickly to the hedge, where she seized Tip's
collar and dragged him back to where she had left her basket and the
pumpkin-headed man.

"You naughty, sneaking, wicked boy!" she exclaimed, furiously; "I'll
teach you to spy out my secrets and to make fun of me!"

"I wasn't making fun of you," protested Tip. "I was laughing at old
Pumpkinhead! Look at him! Isn't he a picture, though?"

"I hope you are not reflecting on my personal appearance," said Jack;
and it was so funny to hear his grave voice, while his face continued
to wear its jolly smile, that Tip again burst into a peal of laughter.

Even Mombi was not without a curious interest in the man her magic had
brought to life; for, after staring at him intently, she presently
asked:

[Illustration: OLD MOMBI PUTS JACK IN THE STABLE]

"What do you know?"

"Well, that is hard to tell," replied Jack. "For although I feel that
I know a tremendous lot, I am not yet aware how much there is in the
world to find out about. It will take me a little time to discover
whether I am very wise or very foolish."

"To be sure," said Mombi, thoughtfully.

"But what are you going to do with him, now he is alive?" asked Tip,
wondering.

"I must think it over," answered Mombi. "But we must get home at once,
for it is growing dark. Help the Pumpkinhead to walk."

"Never mind me," said Jack; "I can walk as well as you can. Haven't I
got legs and feet, and aren't they jointed?"

"Are they?" asked the woman, turning to Tip.

"Of course they are; I made 'em myself," returned the boy, with pride.

So they started for the house; but when they reached the farm yard old
Mombi led the pumpkin man to the cow stable and shut him up in an empty
stall, fastening the door securely on the outside.

"I've got to attend to you, first," she said, nodding her head at Tip.

Hearing this, the boy became uneasy; for he knew Mombi had a bad and
revengeful heart, and would not hesitate to do any evil thing.

They entered the house. It was a round, dome-shaped structure, as are
nearly all the farm houses in the Land of Oz.

Mombi bade the boy light a candle, while she put her basket in a
cupboard and hung her cloak on a peg. Tip obeyed quickly, for he was
afraid of her.

After the candle had been lighted Mombi ordered him to build a fire
in the hearth, and while Tip was thus engaged the old woman ate her
supper. When the flames began to crackle the boy came to her and asked
a share of the bread and cheese; but Mombi refused him.

"I'm hungry!" said Tip, in a sulky tone.

"You won't be hungry long," replied Mombi, with a grim look.

The boy didn't like this speech, for it sounded like a threat; but he
happened to remember he had nuts in his pocket, so he cracked some of
those and ate them while the woman rose, shook the crumbs from her
apron, and hung above the fire a small black kettle.

Then she measured out equal parts of milk and vinegar and poured them
into the kettle. Next she produced several packets of herbs and
powders and began adding a portion of each to the contents of the
kettle. Occasionally she would draw near the candle and read from a
yellow paper the recipe of the mess she was concocting.

As Tip watched her his uneasiness increased.

"What is that for?" he asked.

"For you," returned Mombi, briefly.

Tip wriggled around upon his stool and stared awhile at the kettle,
which was beginning to bubble. Then he would glance at the stern and
wrinkled features of the witch and wish he were any place but in that
dim and smoky kitchen, where even the shadows cast by the candle upon
the wall were enough to give one the horrors. So an hour passed away,
during which the silence was only broken by the bubbling of the pot and
the hissing of the flames.

Finally, Tip spoke again.

"Have I got to drink that stuff?" he asked, nodding toward the pot.

"Yes," said Mombi.

"What'll it do to me?" asked Tip.

"If it's properly made," replied Mombi, "it will change or transform
you into a marble statue."

Tip groaned, and wiped the perspiration from his forehead with his
sleeve.

"I don't want to be a marble statue!" he protested.

"That doesn't matter; I want you to be one," said the old woman,
looking at him severely.

"What use'll I be then?" asked Tip. "There won't be any one to work for
you."

"I'll make the Pumpkinhead work for me," said Mombi.

Again Tip groaned.

"Why don't you change me into a goat, or a chicken?" he asked,
anxiously. "You can't do anything with a marble statue."

"Oh, yes; I can," returned Mombi. "I'm going to plant a flower garden,
next Spring, and I'll put you in the middle of it, for an ornament. I
wonder I haven't thought of that before; you've been a bother to me for
years."

At this terrible speech Tip felt the beads of perspiration starting all
over his body; but he sat still and shivered and looked anxiously at
the kettle.

"Perhaps it won't work," he muttered, in a voice that sounded weak and
discouraged.

"Oh, I think it will," answered Mombi, cheerfully. "I seldom make a
mistake."

Again there was a period of silence--a silence so long and gloomy that
when Mombi finally lifted the kettle from the fire it was close to
midnight.

[Illustration: "I DON'T WANT TO BE A MARBLE STATUE."]

"You cannot drink it until it has become quite cold," announced the
old witch--for in spite of the law she had acknowledged practising
witchcraft. "We must both go to bed now, and at daybreak I will call
you and at once complete your transformation into a marble statue."

With this she hobbled into her room, bearing the steaming kettle with
her, and Tip heard her close and lock the door.

The boy did not go to bed, as he had been commanded to do, but still
sat glaring at the embers of the dying fire.

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    The Flight of the
    Fugitives
]


Tip reflected.

"It's a hard thing, to be a marble statue," he thought, rebelliously,
"and I'm not going to stand it. For years I've been a bother to her,
she says; so she's going to get rid of me. Well, there's an easier way
than to become a statue. No boy could have any fun forever standing in
the middle of a flower garden! I'll run away, that's what I'll do--and
I may as well go before she makes me drink that nasty stuff in the
kettle."

He waited until the snores of the old witch announced she was fast
asleep, and then he arose softly and went to the cupboard to find
something to eat.

"No use starting on a journey without food," he decided, searching upon
the narrow shelves.

He found some crusts of bread; but he had to look into Mombi's basket
to find the cheese she had brought from the village. While turning over
the contents of the basket he came upon the pepper-box which contained
the "Powder of Life."

"I may as well take this with me," he thought, "or Mombi'll be using it
to make more mischief with." So he put the box in his pocket, together
with the bread and cheese.

Then he cautiously left the house and latched the door behind him.
Outside both moon and stars shone brightly, and the night seemed
peaceful and inviting after the close and ill-smelling kitchen.

"I'll be glad to get away," said Tip, softly; "for I never did like
that old woman. I wonder how I ever came to live with her."

He was walking slowly toward the road when a thought made him pause.

"I don't like to leave Jack Pumpkinhead to the tender mercies of old
Mombi," he muttered. "And Jack belongs to me, for I made him--even if
the old witch did bring him to life."

He retraced his steps to the cow-stable and opened the door of the
stall where the pumpkin-headed man had been left.

[Illustration: "TIP LED HIM ALONG THE PATH."]

Jack was standing in the middle of the stall, and by the moonlight Tip
could see he was smiling just as jovially as ever.

"Come on!" said the boy, beckoning.

"Where to?" asked Jack.

"You'll know as soon as I do," answered Tip, smiling sympathetically
into the pumpkin face. "All we've got to do now is to tramp."

"Very well," returned Jack, and walked awkwardly out of the stable and
into the moonlight.

Tip turned toward the road and the man followed him. Jack walked with a
sort of limp, and occasionally one of the joints of his legs would turn
backward, instead of frontwise, almost causing him to tumble. But the
Pumpkinhead was quick to notice this, and began to take more pains to
step carefully; so that he met with few accidents.

Tip led him along the path without stopping an instant. They could not
go very fast, but they walked steadily; and by the time the moon sank
away and the sun peeped over the hills they had travelled so great a
distance that the boy had no reason to fear pursuit from the old witch.
Moreover, he had turned first into one path, and then into another, so
that should anyone follow them it would prove very difficult to guess
which way they had gone, or where to seek them.

[Illustration]

Fairly satisfied that he had escaped--for a time, at least--being
turned into a marble statue, the boy stopped his companion and seated
himself upon a rock by the roadside.

"Let's have some breakfast," he said.

Jack Pumpkinhead watched Tip curiously, but refused to join in the
repast.

"I don't seem to be made the same way you are," he said.

"I know you are not," returned Tip; "for I made you."

"Oh! Did you?" asked Jack.

"Certainly. And put you together. And carved your eyes and nose and
ears and mouth," said Tip proudly. "And dressed you."

Jack looked at his body and limbs critically.

"It strikes me you made a very good job of it," he remarked.

"Just so-so," replied Tip, modestly; for he began to see certain
defects in the construction of his man. "If I'd known we were going to
travel together I might have been a little more particular."

"Why, then," said the Pumpkinhead, in a tone that expressed surprise,
"you must be my creator--my parent--my father!"

"Or your inventor," replied the boy with a laugh. "Yes, my son; I
really believe I am!"

"Then I owe you obedience," continued the man, "and you owe
me--support."

"That's it, exactly," declared Tip, jumping up. "So let us be off."

"Where are we going?" asked Jack, when they had resumed their journey.

"I'm not exactly sure," said the boy; "but I believe we are headed
South, and that will bring us, sooner or later, to the Emerald City."

"What city is that?" enquired the Pumpkinhead.

"Why, it's the center of the Land of Oz, and the biggest town in all
the country. I've never been there, myself, but I've heard all about
its history. It was built by a mighty and wonderful Wizard named Oz,
and everything there is of a green color--just as everything in this
Country of the Gillikins is of a purple color."

"Is everything here purple?" asked Jack.

"Of course it is. Can't you see?" returned the boy.

"I believe I must be color-blind," said the Pumpkinhead, after staring
about him.

"Well, the grass is purple, and the trees are purple, and the houses
and fences are purple," explained Tip. "Even the mud in the roads is
purple. But in the Emerald City everything is green that is purple
here. And in the Country of the Munchkins, over at the East, everything
is blue; and in the South country of the Quadlings everything is red;
and in the West country of the Winkies, where the Tin Woodman rules,
everything is yellow."

"Oh!" said Jack. Then, after a pause, he asked: "Did you say a Tin
Woodman rules the Winkies?"

"Yes; he was one of those who helped Dorothy to destroy the Wicked
Witch of the West, and the Winkies were so grateful that they invited
him to become their ruler,--just as the people of the Emerald City
invited the Scarecrow to rule them."

"Dear me!" said Jack. "I'm getting confused with all this history. Who
is the Scarecrow?"

"Another friend of Dorothy's," replied Tip.

"And who is Dorothy?"

"She was a girl that came here from Kansas, a place in the big, outside
World. She got blown to the Land of Oz by a cyclone, and while she was
here the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman accompanied her on her travels."

"And where is she now?" inquired the Pumpkinhead.

"Glinda the Good, who rules the Quadlings, sent her home again," said
the boy.

"Oh. And what became of the Scarecrow?"

"I told you. He rules the Emerald City," answered Tip.

"I thought you said it was ruled by a wonderful Wizard," objected Jack,
seeming more and more confused.

"Well, so I did. Now, pay attention, and I'll explain it," said Tip,
speaking slowly and looking the smiling Pumpkinhead squarely in the
eye. "Dorothy went to the Emerald City to ask the Wizard to send her
back to Kansas; and the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman went with her.
But the Wizard couldn't send her back, because he wasn't so much of a
Wizard as he might have been. And then they got angry at the Wizard,
and threatened to expose him; so the Wizard made a big balloon and
escaped in it, and no one has ever seen him since."

"Now, that is very interesting history," said Jack, well pleased; "and
I understand it perfectly--all but the explanation."

"I'm glad you do," responded Tip. "After the Wizard was gone, the
people of the Emerald City made His Majesty, the Scarecrow, their King;
and I have heard that he became a very popular ruler."

"Are we going to see this queer King?" asked Jack, with interest.

"I think we may as well," replied the boy; "unless you have something
better to do."

"Oh, no, dear father," said the Pumpkinhead. "I am quite willing to go
wherever you please."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    Tip Makes an
    Experiment in Magic
]


The boy, small and rather delicate in appearance, seemed somewhat
embarrassed at being called "father" by the tall, awkward,
pumpkin-headed man; but to deny the relationship would involve another
long and tedious explanation; so he changed the subject by asking,
abruptly:

"Are you tired?"

"Of course not!" replied the other. "But," he continued, after a pause,
"it is quite certain I shall wear out my wooden joints if I keep on
walking."

Tip reflected, as they journeyed on, that this was true. He began to
regret that he had not constructed the wooden limbs more carefully and
substantially. Yet how could he ever have guessed that the man he had
made merely to scare old Mombi with would be brought to life by means
of a magical powder contained in an old pepper-box?

So he ceased to reproach himself, and began to think how he might yet
remedy the deficiencies of Jack's weak joints.

While thus engaged they came to the edge of a wood, and the boy sat
down to rest upon an old saw-horse that some woodcutter had left there.

[Illustration]

"Why don't you sit down?" he asked the Pumpkinhead.

"Won't it strain my joints?" inquired the other.

"Of course not. It'll rest them," declared the boy.

So Jack tried to sit down; but as soon as he bent his joints farther
than usual they gave way altogether, and he came clattering to the
ground with such a crash that Tip feared he was entirely ruined.

He rushed to the man, lifted him to his feet, straightened his arms and
legs, and felt of his head to see if by chance it had become cracked.
But Jack seemed to be in pretty good shape, after all, and Tip said to
him:

"I guess you'd better remain standing, hereafter. It seems the safest
way."

"Very well, dear father; just as you say," replied the smiling Jack,
who had been in no wise confused by his tumble.

Tip sat down again. Presently the Pumpkinhead asked:

"What is that thing you are sitting on?"

"Oh, this is a horse," replied the boy, carelessly.

"What is a horse?" demanded Jack.

"A horse? Why, there are two kinds of horses," returned Tip, slightly
puzzled how to explain. "One kind of horse is alive, and has four legs
and a head and a tail. And people ride upon its back."

"I understand," said Jack, cheerfully. "That's the kind of horse you
are now sitting on."

"No, it isn't," answered Tip, promptly.

"Why not? That one has four legs, and a head, and a tail."

Tip looked at the saw-horse more carefully, and found that the
Pumpkinhead was right. The body had been formed from a tree-trunk, and
a branch had been left sticking up at one end that looked very much
like a tail. In the other end were two big knots that resembled eyes,
and a place had been chopped away that might easily be mistaken for the
horse's mouth. As for the legs, they were four straight limbs cut from
trees and stuck fast into the body, being spread wide apart so that the
saw-horse would stand firmly when a log was laid across it to be sawed.

"This thing resembles a real horse more than I imagined," said Tip,
trying to explain. "But a real horse is alive, and trots and prances
and eats oats, while this is nothing more than a dead horse, made of
wood, and used to saw logs upon."

"If it were alive, wouldn't it trot, and prance, and eat oats?"
inquired the Pumpkinhead.

"It would trot and prance, perhaps; but it wouldn't eat oats," replied
the boy, laughing at the idea. "And of course it can't ever be alive,
because it is made of wood."

"So am I," answered the man.

Tip looked at him in surprise.

"Why, so you are!" he exclaimed. "And the magic powder that brought you
to life is here in my pocket."

[Illustration: THE MAGICAL POWDER OF LIFE]

He brought out the pepper box, and eyed it curiously.

"I wonder," said he, musingly, "if it would bring the saw-horse to
life."

"If it would," returned Jack, calmly--for nothing seemed to surprise
him--"I could ride on its back, and that would save my joints from
wearing out."

"I'll try it!" cried the boy, jumping up. "But I wonder if I can
remember the words old Mombi said, and the way she held her hands up."

He thought it over for a minute, and as he had watched carefully from
the hedge every motion of the old witch, and listened to her words, he
believed he could repeat exactly what she had said and done.

So he began by sprinkling some of the magic Powder of Life from the
pepper-box upon the body of the saw-horse. Then he lifted his left
hand, with the little finger pointing upward, and said "Weaugh!"

"What does that mean, dear father?" asked Jack, curiously.

"I don't know," answered Tip. Then he lifted his right hand, with the
thumb pointing upward, and said: "Teaugh!"

"What's that, dear father?" inquired Jack.

"It means you must keep quiet!" replied the boy, provoked at being
interrupted at so important a moment.

"How fast I am learning!" remarked the Pumpkinhead, with his eternal
smile.

Tip now lifted both hands above his head, with all the fingers and
thumbs spread out, and cried in a loud voice: "Peaugh!"

Immediately the saw-horse moved, stretched its legs, yawned with its
chopped-out mouth, and shook a few grains of the powder off its back.
The rest of the powder seemed to have vanished into the body of the
horse.

"Good!" called Jack, while the boy looked on in astonishment. "You are
a very clever sorcerer, dear father!"

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    The Awakening
    of the Saw-Horse
]


The Saw-Horse, finding himself alive, seemed even more astonished
than Tip. He rolled his knotty eyes from side to side, taking a first
wondering view of the world in which he had now so important an
existence. Then he tried to look at himself; but he had, indeed, no
neck to turn; so that in the endeavor to see his body he kept circling
around and around, without catching even a glimpse of it. His legs
were stiff and awkward, for there were no knee-joints in them; so that
presently he bumped against Jack Pumpkinhead and sent that personage
tumbling upon the moss that lined the roadside.

Tip became alarmed at this accident, as well as at the persistence of
the Saw-Horse in prancing around in a circle; so he called out:

"Whoa! Whoa, there!"

The Saw-Horse paid no attention whatever to this command, and the next
instant brought one of his wooden legs down upon Tip's foot so forcibly
that the boy danced away in pain to a safer distance, from where he
again yelled:

"Whoa! Whoa, I say!"

Jack had now managed to raise himself to a sitting position, and he
looked at the Saw-Horse with much interest.

"I don't believe the animal can hear you," he remarked.

"I shout loud enough, don't I?" answered Tip, angrily.

"Yes; but the horse has no ears," said the smiling Pumpkinhead.

"Sure enough!" exclaimed Tip, noting the fact for the first time. "How,
then, am I going to stop him?"

But at that instant the Saw-Horse stopped himself, having concluded it
was impossible to see his own body. He saw Tip, however, and came close
to the boy to observe him more fully.

It was really comical to see the creature walk; for it moved the legs
on its right side together, and those on its left side together, as a
pacing horse does; and that made its body rock sidewise, like a cradle.

Tip patted it upon the head, and said "Good boy! Good boy!" in a
coaxing tone; and the Saw-Horse pranced away to examine with its
bulging eyes the form of Jack Pumpkinhead.

"I must find a halter for him," said Tip; and having made a search
in his pocket he produced a roll of strong cord. Unwinding this,
he approached the Saw-Horse and tied the cord around its neck,
afterward fastening the other end to a large tree. The Saw-Horse, not
understanding the action, stepped backward and snapped the string
easily; but it made no attempt to run away.

"He's stronger than I thought," said the boy, "and rather obstinate,
too."

"Why don't you make him some ears?" asked Jack. "Then you can tell him
what to do."

"That's a splendid idea!" said Tip. "How did you happen to think of it?"

"Why, I didn't think of it," answered the Pumpkinhead; "I didn't need
to, for it's the simplest and easiest thing to do."

So Tip got out his knife and fashioned some ears out of the bark of a
small tree.

"I mustn't make them too big," he said, as he whittled, "or our horse
would become a donkey."

"How is that?" inquired Jack, from the roadside.

"Why, a horse has bigger ears than a man; and a donkey has bigger ears
than a horse," explained Tip.

"Then, if my ears were longer, would I be a horse?" asked Jack.

"My friend," said Tip, gravely, "you'll never be anything but a
Pumpkinhead, no matter how big your ears are."

"Oh," returned Jack, nodding; "I think I understand."

"If you do, you're a wonder," remarked the boy; "but there's no harm in
_thinking_ you understand. I guess these ears are ready now. Will you
hold the horse while I stick them on?"

"Certainly, if you'll help me up," said Jack.

So Tip raised him to his feet, and the Pumpkinhead went to the horse
and held its head while the boy bored two holes in it with his
knife-blade and inserted the ears.

"They make him look very handsome," said Jack, admiringly.

But those words, spoken close to the Saw-Horse, and being the first
sounds he had ever heard, so startled the animal that he made a bound
forward and tumbled Tip on one side and Jack on the other. Then he
continued to rush forward as if frightened by the clatter of his own
footsteps.

"Whoa!" shouted Tip, picking himself up; "whoa! you idiot--whoa!"

The Saw-Horse would probably have paid no attention to this, but just
then it stepped a leg into a gopher-hole and stumbled head-over-heels
to the ground, where it lay upon its back, frantically waving its four
legs in the air.

Tip ran up to it.

"You're a nice sort of a horse, I must say!" he exclaimed. "Why didn't
you stop when I yelled 'whoa?'"

"Does 'whoa' mean to stop?" asked the Saw-Horse, in a surprised voice,
as it rolled its eyes upward to look at the boy.

"Of course it does," answered Tip.

"And a hole in the ground means to stop, also, doesn't it?" continued
the horse.

"To be sure; unless you step over it," said Tip.

"What a strange place this is," the creature exclaimed, as if amazed.
"What am I doing here, anyway?"

[Illustration: "DO KEEP THOSE LEGS STILL."]

"Why, I've brought you to life," answered the boy; "but it won't hurt
you any, if you mind me and do as I tell you."

"Then I will do as you tell me," replied the Saw-Horse, humbly. "But
what happened to me, a moment ago? I don't seem to be just right,
someway."

"You're upside down," explained Tip. "But just keep those legs still a
minute and I'll set you right side up again."

"How many sides have I?" asked the creature, wonderingly.

"Several," said Tip, briefly. "But do keep those legs still."

The Saw-Horse now became quiet, and held its legs rigid; so that Tip,
after several efforts, was able to roll him over and set him upright.

"Ah, I seem all right now," said the queer animal, with a sigh.

"One of your ears is broken," Tip announced, after a careful
examination. "I'll have to make a new one."

Then he led the Saw-Horse back to where Jack was vainly struggling to
regain his feet, and after assisting the Pumpkinhead to stand upright
Tip whittled out a new ear and fastened it to the horse's head.

"Now," said he, addressing his steed, "pay attention to what I'm going
to tell you. 'Whoa!' means to stop; 'Get-Up!' means to walk forward;
'Trot!' means to go as fast as you can. Understand?"

"I believe I do," returned the horse.

"Very good. We are all going on a journey to the Emerald City, to see
His Majesty, the Scarecrow; and Jack Pumpkinhead is going to ride on
your back, so he won't wear out his joints."

"I don't mind," said the Saw-Horse. "Anything that suits you suits me."

Then Tip assisted Jack to get upon the horse.

"Hold on tight," he cautioned, "or you may fall off and crack your
pumpkin head."

"That would be horrible!" said Jack, with a shudder. "What shall I hold
on to?"

"Why, hold on to his ears," replied Tip, after a moment's hesitation.

"Don't do that!" remonstrated the Saw-Horse; "for then I can't hear."

That seemed reasonable, so Tip tried to think of something else.

"I'll fix it!" said he, at length. He went into the wood and cut a
short length of limb from a young, stout tree. One end of this he
sharpened to a point, and then he dug a hole in the back of the
Saw-Horse, just behind its head. Next he brought a piece of rock from
the road and hammered the post firmly into the animal's back.

[Illustration: "DOES IT HURT?" ASKED THE BOY.]

"Stop! Stop!" shouted the horse; "you're jarring me terribly."

"Does it hurt?" asked the boy.

"Not exactly hurt," answered the animal; "but it makes me quite nervous
to be jarred."

"Well, it's all over now," said Tip, encouragingly. "Now, Jack, be sure
to hold fast to this post, and then you can't fall off and get smashed."

So Jack held on tight, and Tip said to the horse:

"Get-up."

The obedient creature at once walked forward, rocking from side to side
as he raised his feet from the ground.

Tip walked beside the Saw-Horse, quite content with this addition to
their party. Presently he began to whistle.

"What does that sound mean?" asked the horse.

"Don't pay any attention to it," said Tip. "I'm just whistling, and
that only means I'm pretty well satisfied."

"I'd whistle myself, if I could push my lips together," remarked Jack.
"I fear, dear father, that in some respects I am sadly lacking."

After journeying on for some distance the narrow path they were
following turned into a broad road-way, paved with yellow brick. By the
side of the road Tip noticed a sign-post that read:

"NINE MILES TO THE EMERALD CITY."

But it was now growing dark, so he decided to camp for the night by the
roadside and to resume the journey next morning by daybreak. He led the
Saw-Horse to a grassy mound upon which grew several bushy trees, and
carefully assisted the Pumpkinhead to alight.

"I think I'll lay you upon the ground, overnight," said the boy. "You
will be safer that way."

"How about me?" asked the Saw-Horse.

"It won't hurt you to stand," replied Tip; "and, as you can't sleep,
you may as well watch out and see that no one comes near to disturb us."

Then the boy stretched himself upon the grass beside the Pumpkinhead,
and being greatly wearied by the journey was soon fast asleep.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    Jack Pumpkinhead's Ride
    to the Emerald City
]


At daybreak Tip was awakened by the Pumpkinhead. He rubbed the sleep
from his eyes, bathed in a little brook, and then ate a portion of his
bread and cheese. Having thus prepared for a new day the boy said:

"Let us start at once. Nine miles is quite a distance, but we ought to
reach the Emerald City by noon if no accidents happen."

So the Pumpkinhead was again perched upon the back of the Saw-Horse and
the journey was resumed.

Tip noticed that the purple tint of the grass and trees had now faded
to a dull lavender, and before long this lavender appeared to take on
a greenish tinge that gradually brightened as they drew nearer to the
great City where the Scarecrow ruled.

The little party had traveled but a short two miles upon their way when
the road of yellow brick was parted by a broad and swift river. Tip was
puzzled how to cross over; but after a time he discovered a man in a
ferry-boat approaching from the other side of the stream.

When the man reached the bank Tip asked:

"Will you row us to the other side?"

"Yes, if you have money," returned the ferryman, whose face looked
cross and disagreeable.

"But I have no money," said Tip.

"None at all?" inquired the man.

"None at all," answered the boy.

"Then I'll not break my back rowing you over," said the ferryman,
decidedly.

"What a nice man!" remarked the Pumpkinhead, smilingly.

The ferryman stared at him, but made no reply. Tip was trying to
think, for it was a great disappointment to him to find his journey so
suddenly brought to an end.

"I must certainly get to the Emerald City," he said to the boatman;
"but how can I cross the river if you do not take me?"

The man laughed, and it was not a nice laugh.

"That wooden horse will float," said he; "and you can ride him across.
As for the pumpkin-headed loon who accompanies you, let him sink or
swim--it won't matter greatly which."

[Illustration]

"Don't worry about me," said Jack, smiling pleasantly upon the crabbed
ferryman; "I'm sure I ought to float beautifully."

Tip thought the experiment was worth making, and the Saw-Horse, who did
not know what danger meant, offered no objections whatever. So the boy
led it down into the water and climbed upon its back. Jack also waded
in up to his knees and grasped the tail of the horse so that he might
keep his pumpkin head above the water.

"Now," said Tip, instructing the Saw-Horse, "if you wiggle your legs
you will probably swim; and if you swim we shall probably reach the
other side."

The Saw-Horse at once began to wiggle its legs, which acted as oars and
moved the adventurers slowly across the river to the opposite side.
So successful was the trip that presently they were climbing, wet and
dripping, up the grassy bank.

Tip's trouser-legs and shoes were thoroughly soaked; but the Saw-Horse
had floated so perfectly that from his knees up the boy was entirely
dry. As for the Pumpkinhead, every stitch of his gorgeous clothing
dripped water.

"The sun will soon dry us," said Tip; "and, anyhow, we are now safely
across, in spite of the ferryman, and can continue our journey."

"I didn't mind swimming, at all," remarked the horse.

"Nor did I," added Jack.

They soon regained the road of yellow brick, which proved to be a
continuation of the road they had left on the other side, and then Tip
once more mounted the Pumpkinhead upon the back of the Saw-Horse.

"If you ride fast," said he, "the wind will help to dry your clothing.
I will hold on to the horse's tail and run after you. In this way we
all will become dry in a very short time."

"Then the horse must step lively," said Jack.

"I'll do my best," returned the Saw-Horse, cheerfully.

Tip grasped the end of the branch that served as tail to the Saw-Horse,
and called loudly: "Get-up!"

The horse started at a good pace, and Tip followed behind. Then he
decided they could go faster, so he shouted: "Trot!"

[Illustration]

Now, the Saw-Horse remembered that this word was the command to go as
fast as he could; so he began rocking along the road at a tremendous
pace, and Tip had hard work--running faster than he ever had before in
his life--to keep his feet.

Soon he was out of breath, and although he wanted to call "Whoa!" to
the horse, he found he could not get the word out of his throat. Then
the end of the tail he was clutching, being nothing more than a dead
branch, suddenly broke away, and the next minute the boy was rolling
in the dust of the road, while the horse and its pumpkin-headed rider
dashed on and quickly disappeared in the distance.

By the time Tip had picked himself up and cleared the dust from his
throat so he could say "Whoa!" there was no further need of saying it,
for the horse was long since out of sight.

So he did the only sensible thing he could do. He sat down and took a
good rest, and afterward began walking along the road.

"Some time I will surely overtake them," he reflected; "for the road
will end at the gates of the Emerald City, and they can go no further
than that."

Meantime Jack was holding fast to the post and the Saw-Horse was
tearing along the road like a racer. Neither of them knew Tip was left
behind, for the Pumpkinhead did not look around and the Saw-Horse
couldn't.

As he rode, Jack noticed that the grass and trees had become a bright
emerald-green in color, so he guessed they were nearing the Emerald
City even before the tall spires and domes came into sight.

At length a high wall of green stone, studded thick with emeralds,
loomed up before them; and fearing the Saw-Horse would not know enough
to stop and so might smash them both against this wall, Jack ventured
to cry "Whoa!" as loud as he could.

So suddenly did the horse obey that had it not been for his post Jack
would have been pitched off head foremost, and his beautiful face
ruined.

"That was a fast ride, dear father!" he exclaimed; and then, hearing no
reply, he turned around and discovered for the first time that Tip was
not there.

This apparent desertion puzzled the Pumpkinhead, and made him uneasy.
And while he was wondering what had become of the boy, and what he
ought to do next under such trying circumstances, the gateway in the
green wall opened and a man came out.

This man was short and round, with a fat face that seemed remarkably
good-natured. He was clothed all in green and wore a high, peaked green
hat upon his head and green spectacles over his eyes. Bowing before the
Pumpkinhead he said:

"I am the Guardian of the Gates of the Emerald City. May I inquire who
you are, and what is your business?"

"My name is Jack Pumpkinhead," returned the other, smilingly; "but as
to my business, I haven't the least idea in the world what it is."

The Guardian of the Gates looked surprised, and shook his head as if
dissatisfied with the reply.

"What are you, a man or a pumpkin?" he asked, politely.

"Both, if you please," answered Jack.

"And this wooden horse--is it alive?" questioned the Guardian.

The horse rolled one knotty eye upward and winked at Jack. Then it gave
a prance and brought one leg down on the Guardian's toes.

"Ouch!" cried the man; "I'm sorry I asked that question. But the answer
is most convincing. Have you any errand, sir, in the Emerald City?"

"It seems to me that I have," replied the Pumpkinhead, seriously; "but
I cannot think what it is. My father knows all about it, but he is not
here."

"This is a strange affair--very strange!" declared the Guardian. "But
you seem harmless. Folks do not smile so delightfully when they mean
mischief."

"As for that," said Jack, "I cannot help my smile, for it is carved on
my face with a jack-knife."

"Well, come with me into my room," resumed the Guardian, "and I will
see what can be done for you."

So Jack rode the Saw-Horse through the gate-way into a little room
built into the wall. The Guardian pulled a bell-cord, and presently
a very tall soldier--clothed in a green uniform--entered from the
opposite door. This soldier carried a long green gun over his shoulder
and had lovely green whiskers that fell quite to his knees. The
Guardian at once addressed him, saying:

"Here is a strange gentleman who doesn't know why he has come to the
Emerald City, or what he wants. Tell me, what shall we do with him?"

The Soldier with the Green Whiskers looked at Jack with much care and
curiosity. Finally he shook his head so positively that little waves
rippled down his whiskers, and then he said:

"I must take him to His Majesty, the Scarecrow."

"But what will His Majesty, the Scarecrow, do with him?" asked the
Guardian of the Gates.

"That is His Majesty's business," returned the soldier. "I have
troubles enough of my own. All outside troubles must be turned over to
His Majesty. So put the spectacles on this fellow, and I'll take him to
the royal palace."

So the Guardian opened a big box of spectacles and tried to fit a pair
to Jack's great round eyes.

"I haven't a pair in stock that will really cover those eyes up," said
the little man, with a sigh; "and your head is so big that I shall be
obliged to tie the spectacles on."

"But why need I wear spectacles?" asked Jack.

"It's the fashion here," said the Soldier, "and they will keep you from
being blinded by the glitter and glare of the gorgeous Emerald City."

"Oh!" exclaimed Jack. "Tie them on, by all means. I don't wish to be
blinded."

"Nor I!" broke in the Saw-Horse; so a pair of green spectacles was
quickly fastened over the bulging knots that served it for eyes.

Then the Soldier with the Green Whiskers led them through the inner
gate and they at once found themselves in the main street of the
magnificent Emerald City.

Sparkling green gems ornamented the fronts of the beautiful houses and
the towers and turrets were all faced with emeralds. Even the green
marble pavement glittered with precious stones, and it was indeed a
grand and marvelous sight to one who beheld it for the first time.

However, the Pumpkinhead and the Saw-Horse, knowing nothing of wealth
and beauty, paid little attention to the wonderful sights they saw
through their green spectacles. They calmly followed after the green
soldier and scarcely noticed the crowds of green people who stared
at them in surprise. When a green dog ran out and barked at them the
Saw-Horse promptly kicked at it with its wooden leg and sent the little
animal howling into one of the houses; but nothing more serious than
this happened to interrupt their progress to the royal palace.

The Pumpkinhead wanted to ride up the green marble steps and straight
into the Scarecrow's presence; but the soldier would not permit that.
So Jack dismounted, with much difficulty, and a servant led the
Saw-Horse around to the rear while the Soldier with the Green Whiskers
escorted the Pumpkinhead into the palace, by the front entrance.

The stranger was left in a handsomely furnished waiting room while the
soldier went to announce him. It so happened that at this hour His
Majesty was at leisure and greatly bored for want of something to do,
so he ordered his visitor to be shown at once into his throne room.

Jack felt no fear or embarrassment at meeting the ruler of this
magnificent city, for he was entirely ignorant of all worldly customs.
But when he entered the room and saw for the first time His Majesty
the Scarecrow seated upon his glittering throne, he stopped short in
amazement.

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    His majesty the Scarecrow
]


I suppose every reader of this book knows what a scarecrow is; but Jack
Pumpkinhead, never having seen such a creation, was more surprised at
meeting the remarkable King of the Emerald City than by any other one
experience of his brief life.

His Majesty the Scarecrow was dressed in a suit of faded blue clothes,
and his head was merely a small sack stuffed with straw, upon which
eyes, ears, a nose and a mouth had been rudely painted to represent a
face. The clothes were also stuffed with straw, and that so unevenly
or carelessly that his Majesty's legs and arms seemed more bumpy
than was necessary. Upon his hands were gloves with long fingers,
and these were padded with cotton. Wisps of straw stuck out from the
monarch's coat and also from his neck and boot-tops. Upon his head
he wore a heavy golden crown set thick with sparkling jewels, and
the weight of this crown caused his brow to sag in wrinkles, giving
a thoughtful expression to the painted face. Indeed, the crown alone
betokened majesty; in all else the Scarecrow King was but a simple
scarecrow--flimsy, awkward, and unsubstantial.

But if the strange appearance of his Majesty the Scarecrow seemed
startling to Jack, no less wonderful was the form of the Pumpkinhead
to the Scarecrow. The purple trousers and pink waistcoat and red
shirt hung loosely over the wooden joints Tip had manufactured, and
the carved face on the pumpkin grinned perpetually, as if its wearer
considered life the jolliest thing imaginable.

At first, indeed, His Majesty thought his queer visitor was laughing at
him, and was inclined to resent such a liberty; but it was not without
reason that the Scarecrow had attained the reputation of being the
wisest personage in the Land of Oz. He made a more careful examination
of his visitor, and soon discovered that Jack's features were carved
into a smile and that he could not look grave if he wished to.

The King was the first to speak. After regarding

[Illustration]

Jack for some minutes he said, in a tone of wonder:

"Where on earth did you come from, and how do you happen to be alive?"

"I beg your Majesty's pardon," returned the Pumpkinhead; "but I do not
understand you."

"What don't you understand?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Why, I don't understand your language. You see, I came from the
Country of the Gillikins, so that I am a foreigner."

"Ah, to be sure!" exclaimed the Scarecrow. "I myself speak the language
of the Munchkins, which is also the language of the Emerald City. But
you, I suppose, speak the language of the Pumpkinheads?"

"Exactly so, your Majesty," replied the other, bowing; "so it will be
impossible for us to understand one another."

"That is unfortunate, certainly," said the Scarecrow, thoughtfully. "We
must have an interpreter."

"What is an interpreter?" asked Jack.

"A person who understands both my language and your own. When I say
anything, the interpreter can tell you what I mean; and when you
say anything the interpreter can tell me what _you_ mean. For the
interpreter can speak both languages as well as understand them."

"That is certainly clever," said Jack, greatly pleased at finding so
simple a way out of the difficulty.

So the Scarecrow commanded the Soldier with the Green Whiskers to
search among his people until he found one who understood the language
of the Gillikins as well as the language of the Emerald City, and to
bring that person to him at once.

When the Soldier had departed the Scarecrow said:

"Won't you take a chair while we are waiting?"

"Your Majesty forgets that I cannot understand you," replied the
Pumpkinhead. "If you wish me to sit down you must make a sign for me to
do so."

The Scarecrow came down from his throne and rolled an armchair to a
position behind the Pumpkinhead. Then he gave Jack a sudden push that
sent him sprawling upon the cushions in so awkward a fashion that he
doubled up like a jack-knife, and had hard work to untangle himself.

"Did you understand that sign?" asked His Majesty, politely.

"Perfectly," declared Jack, reaching up his arms to turn his head
to the front, the pumpkin having twisted around upon the stick that
supported it.

"You seem hastily made," remarked the Scarecrow, watching Jack's
efforts to straighten himself.

"Not more so than your Majesty," was the frank reply.

"There is this difference between us," said the Scarecrow, "that
whereas I will bend, but not break, you will break, but not bend."

[Illustration: "HE GAVE JACK A SUDDEN PUSH."]

At this moment the soldier returned leading a young girl by the hand.
She seemed very sweet and modest, having a pretty face and beautiful
green eyes and hair. A dainty green silk skirt reached to her knees,
showing silk stockings embroidered with pea-pods, and green satin
slippers with bunches of lettuce for decorations instead of bows or
buckles. Upon her silken waist clover leaves were embroidered, and
she wore a jaunty little jacket trimmed with sparkling emeralds of a
uniform size.

"Why, it's little Jellia Jamb!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, as the green
maiden bowed her pretty head before him. "Do you understand the
language of the Gillikins, my dear?"

"Yes, your Majesty," she answered, "for I was born in the North
Country."

"Then you shall be our interpreter," said the Scarecrow, "and explain
to this Pumpkinhead all that I say, and also explain to me all that
_he_ says. Is this arrangement satisfactory?" he asked, turning toward
his guest.

"Very satisfactory indeed," was the reply.

"Then ask him, to begin with," resumed the Scarecrow, turning to
Jellia, "what brought him to the Emerald City."

But instead of this the girl, who had been staring at Jack, said to
him:

"You are certainly a wonderful creature. Who made you?"

"A boy named Tip," answered Jack.

"What does he say?" inquired the Scarecrow. "My ears must have deceived
me. What did he say?"

"He says that your Majesty's brains seem to have come loose," replied
the girl, demurely.

The Scarecrow moved uneasily upon his throne, and felt of his head with
his left hand.

"What a fine thing it is to understand two different languages," he
said, with a perplexed sigh. "Ask him, my dear, if he has any objection
to being put in jail for insulting the ruler of the Emerald City.

"I didn't insult you!" protested Jack, indignantly.

"Tut--tut!" cautioned the Scarecrow; "wait until Jellia translates my
speech. What have we got an interpreter for, if you break out in this
rash way?"

"All right, I'll wait," replied the Pumpkinhead, in a surly
tone--although his face smiled as genially as ever. "Translate the
speech, young woman."

"His Majesty inquires if you are hungry," said Jellia.

"Oh, not at all!" answered Jack, more pleasantly. "for it is impossible
for me to eat."

"It's the same way with me," remarked the Scarecrow. "What did he say,
Jellia, my dear?"

"He asked if you were aware that one of your eyes is painted larger
than the other," said the girl, mischievously.

"Don't you believe her, your Majesty," cried Jack.

"Oh, I don't," answered the Scarecrow, calmly. Then, casting a sharp
look at the girl, he asked:

"Are you quite certain you understand the languages of both the
Gillikins and the Munchkins?"

"Quite certain, your Majesty," said Jellia Jamb, trying hard not to
laugh in the face of royalty.

"Then how is it that I seem to understand them myself?" inquired the
Scarecrow.

"Because they are one and the same!" declared the girl, now laughing
merrily. "Does not your Majesty know that in all the land of Oz but one
language is spoken?"

"Is it indeed so?" cried the Scarecrow, much relieved to hear this;
"then I might easily have been my own interpreter!"

"It was all my fault, your Majesty," said Jack, looking rather foolish,
"I thought we must surely speak different languages, since we came from
different countries."

"This should be a warning to you never to think," returned the
Scarecrow, severely. "For unless one can think wisely it is better to
remain a dummy--which you most certainly are."

"I am!--I surely am!" agreed the Pumpkinhead.

"It seems to me," continued the Scarecrow, more mildly, "that your
manufacturer spoiled some good pies to create an indifferent man."

"I assure your Majesty that I did not ask to be created," answered Jack.

"Ah! It was the same in my case," said the King, pleasantly. "And so,
as we differ from all ordinary people, let us become friends."

"With all my heart!" exclaimed Jack.

"What! Have you a heart?" asked the Scarecrow, surprised.

"No; that was only imaginative--I might say, a figure of speech," said
the other.

"Well, your most prominent figure seems to be a figure of wood; so I
must beg you to restrain an imagination which, having no brains, you
have no right to exercise," suggested the Scarecrow, warningly.

"To be sure!" said Jack, without in the least comprehending.

His Majesty then dismissed Jellia Jamb and the Soldier with the Green
Whiskers, and when they were gone he took his new friend by the arm and
led him into the courtyard to play a game of quoits.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    Gen. Jinjur's Army
    of Revolt
]


Tip was so anxious to rejoin his man Jack and the Saw-Horse that he
walked a full half the distance to the Emerald City without stopping to
rest. Then he discovered that he was hungry and the crackers and cheese
he had provided for the journey had all been eaten.

While wondering what he should do in this emergency he came upon a
girl sitting by the roadside. She wore a costume that struck the boy
as being remarkably brilliant: her silken waist being of emerald green
and her skirt of four distinct colors--blue in front, yellow at the
left side, red at the back and purple at the right side. Fastening the
waist in front were four buttons--the top one blue, the next yellow, a
third red and the last purple.

[Illustration]

The splendor of this dress was almost barbaric; so Tip was fully
justified in staring at the gown for some moments before his eyes
were attracted by the pretty face above it. Yes, the face was pretty
enough, he decided; but it wore an expression of discontent coupled to
a shade of defiance or audacity.

While the boy stared the girl looked upon him calmly. A lunch basket
stood beside her, and she held a dainty sandwich in one hand and a
hard-boiled egg in the other, eating with an evident appetite that
aroused Tip's sympathy.

He was just about to ask a share of the luncheon when the girl stood up
and brushed the crumbs from her lap.

"There!" said she; "it is time for me to go. Carry that basket for me
and help yourself to its contents if you are hungry."

Tip seized the basket eagerly and began to eat, following for a time
the strange girl without bothering to ask questions. She walked along
before him with swift strides, and there was about her an air of
decision and importance that led him to suspect she was some great
personage.

Finally, when he had satisfied his hunger, he ran up beside her and
tried to keep pace with her swift footsteps--a very difficult feat, for
she was much taller than he, and evidently in a hurry.

"Thank you very much for the sandwiches," said Tip, as he trotted
along. "May I ask your name?"

"I am General Jinjur," was the brief reply.

"Oh!" said the boy, surprised. "What sort of a General?"

"I command the Army of Revolt in this war," answered the General, with
unnecessary sharpness.

"Oh!" he again exclaimed. "I didn't know there was a war."

"You were not supposed to know it," she returned, "for we have kept it
a secret; and considering that our army is composed entirely of girls,"
she added, with some pride, "it is surely a remarkable thing that our
Revolt is not yet discovered."

"It is, indeed," acknowledged Tip. "But where is your army?"

"About a mile from here," said General Jinjur. "The forces have
assembled from all parts of the Land of Oz, at my express command. For
this is the day we are to conquer His Majesty the Scarecrow, and wrest
from him the throne. The Army of Revolt only awaits my coming to march
upon the Emerald City."

"Well!" declared Tip, drawing a long breath, "this is certainly a
surprising thing! May I ask why you wish to conquer His Majesty the
Scarecrow?"

"Because the Emerald City has been ruled by men long enough, for one
reason," said the girl. "Moreover, the City glitters with beautiful
gems, which might far better be used for rings, bracelets and
necklaces; and there is enough money in the King's treasury to buy
every girl in our Army a dozen new gowns. So we intend to conquer the
City and run the government to suit ourselves."

Jinjur spoke these words with an eagerness and decision that proved she
was in earnest.

"But war is a terrible thing," said Tip, thoughtfully.

"This war will be pleasant," replied the girl, cheerfully.

"Many of you will be slain!" continued the boy, in an awed voice.

"Oh, no," said Jinjur. "What man would oppose a girl, or dare to harm
her? And there is not an ugly face in my entire Army."

Tip laughed.

"Perhaps you are right," said he. "But the Guardian of the Gate is
considered a faithful Guardian, and the King's Army will not let the
City be conquered without a struggle."

"The Army is old and feeble," replied General Jinjur, scornfully. "His
strength has all been used to grow whiskers, and his wife has such a
temper that she has already pulled more than half of them out by the
roots. When the Wonderful Wizard reigned the Soldier with the Green
Whiskers was a very good Royal Army, for people feared the Wizard. But
no one is afraid of the Scarecrow, so his Royal Army don't count for
much in time of war."

After this conversation they proceeded some distance in silence, and
before long reached a large clearing in the forest where fully four
hundred young women were assembled. These were laughing and talking
together as gaily as if they had gathered for a picnic instead of a war
of conquest.

They were divided into four companies, and Tip noticed that all were
dressed in costumes similar to that worn by General Jinjur. The only
real difference was that while those girls from the Munchkin country
had the blue strip in front of their skirts, those from the country of
the Quadlings had the red strip in front; and those from the country
of the Winkies had the yellow strip in front, and the Gillikin girls
wore the purple strip in front. All had green waists, representing the
Emerald City they intended to conquer, and the top button on each waist
indicated by its color which country the wearer came from. The uniforms
were jaunty and becoming, and quite effective when massed together.

Tip thought this strange Army bore no weapons whatever; but in this he
was wrong. For each girl had stuck through the knot of her back hair
two long, glittering knitting-needles.

[Illustration]

General Jinjur immediately mounted the stump of a tree and addressed
her army.

"Friends, fellow-citizens, and girls!" she said; "we are about to begin
our great Revolt against the men of Oz! We march to conquer the Emerald
City--to dethrone the Scarecrow King--to acquire thousands of gorgeous
gems--to rifle the royal treasury--and to obtain power over our former
oppressors!"

"Hurrah!" said those who had listened; but Tip thought most of the Army
was too much engaged in chattering to pay attention to the words of the
General.

The command to march was now given, and the girls formed themselves
into four bands, or companies, and set off with eager strides toward
the Emerald City.

[Illustration]

The boy followed after them, carrying several baskets and wraps and
packages which various members of the Army of Revolt had placed in his
care. It was not long before they came to the green granite walls of
the City and halted before the gateway.

The Guardian of the Gate at once came out and looked at them curiously,
as if a circus had come to town. He carried a bunch of keys swung round
his neck by a golden chain; his hands were thrust carelessly into
his pockets, and he seemed to have no idea at all that the City was
threatened by rebels. Speaking pleasantly to the girls, he said:

"Good morning, my dears! What can I do for you?"

[Illustration]

"Surrender instantly!" answered General Jinjur, standing before him and
frowning as terribly as her pretty face would allow her to.

"Surrender!" echoed the man, astounded. "Why, it's impossible. It's
against the law! I never heard of such a thing in my life."

"Still, you must surrender!" exclaimed the General, fiercely. "We are
revolting!"

"You don't look it," said the Guardian, gazing from one to another,
admiringly.

"But we are!" cried Jinjur, stamping her foot, impatiently; "and we
mean to conquer the Emerald City!"

"Good gracious!" returned the surprised Guardian of the Gates; "what
a nonsensical idea! Go home to your mothers, my good girls, and milk
the cows and bake the bread. Don't you know it's a dangerous thing to
conquer a city?"

"We are not afraid!" responded the General; and she looked so
determined that it made the Guardian uneasy.

So he rang the bell for the Soldier with the Green Whiskers, and the
next minute was sorry he had done so. For immediately he was surrounded
by a crowd of girls who drew the knitting-needles from their hair and
began jabbing them at the Guardian with the sharp points dangerously
near his fat cheeks and blinking eyes.

The poor man howled loudly for mercy and made no resistance when Jinjur
drew the bunch of keys from around his neck.

[Illustration: GENERAL JINJUR AND HER ARMY CAPTURE THE CITY.]

Followed by her Army the General now rushed to the gateway, where she
was confronted by the Royal Army of Oz--which was the other name for
the Soldier with the Green Whiskers.

"Halt!" he cried, and pointed his long gun full in the face of the
leader.

Some of the girls screamed and ran back, but General Jinjur bravely
stood her ground and said, reproachfully:

"Why, how now? Would you shoot a poor, defenceless girl?"

"No," replied the soldier; "for my gun isn't loaded."

"Not loaded?"

"No; for fear of accidents. And I've forgotten where I hid the powder
and shot to load it with. But if you'll wait a short time I'll try to
hunt them up."

"Don't trouble yourself," said Jinjur, cheerfully. Then she turned to
her Army and cried:

"Girls, the gun isn't loaded!"

"Hooray," shrieked the rebels, delighted at this good news, and they
proceeded to rush upon the Soldier with the Green Whiskers in such a
crowd that it was a wonder they didn't stick the knitting-needles into
one another.

But the Royal Army of Oz was too much afraid of women to meet the
onslaught. He simply turned about and ran with all his might through
the gate and toward the royal palace, while General Jinjur and her mob
flocked into the unprotected City.

In this way was the Emerald City captured without a drop of blood being
spilled. The Army of Revolt had become an Army of Conquerors!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

    The Scarecrow
    Plans an escape
]


Tip slipped away from the girls and followed swiftly after the
Soldier with the Green Whiskers. The invading army entered the City
more slowly, for they stopped to dig emeralds out of the walls and
paving-stones with the points of their knitting-needles. So the Soldier
and the boy reached the palace before the news had spread that the City
was conquered.

The Scarecrow and Jack Pumpkinhead were still playing at quoits in
the courtyard when the game was interrupted by the abrupt entrance of
the Royal Army of Oz, who came flying in without his hat or gun, his
clothes in sad disarray and his long beard floating a yard behind him
as he ran.

"Tally one for me," said the Scarecrow, calmly. "What's wrong, my man?"
he added, addressing the Soldier.

"Oh! your Majesty--your Majesty! The City is conquered!" gasped the
Royal Army, who was all out of breath.

"This is quite sudden," said the Scarecrow. "But please go and bar all
the doors and windows of the palace, while I show this Pumpkinhead how
to throw a quoit."

The Soldier hastened to do this, while Tip, who had arrived at his
heels, remained in the courtyard to look at the Scarecrow with
wondering eyes.

His Majesty continued to throw the quoits as coolly as if no danger
threatened his throne, but the Pumpkinhead, having caught sight of Tip,
ambled toward the boy as fast as his wooden legs would go.

"Good afternoon, noble parent!" he cried, delightedly. "I'm glad to see
you are here. That terrible Saw-Horse ran away with me."

"I suspected it," said Tip. "Did you get hurt? Are you cracked at all?"

"No, I arrived safely," answered Jack, "and his Majesty has been very
kind indeed to me."

At this moment the Soldier with the Green Whiskers returned, and the
Scarecrow asked:

"By the way, who has conquered me?"

"A regiment of girls, gathered from the four corners of the Land of
Oz," replied the Soldier, still pale with fear.

"But where was my Standing Army at the time?" inquired his Majesty,
looking at the Soldier, gravely.

"Your Standing Army was running," answered the fellow, honestly; "for
no man could face the terrible weapons of the invaders."

"Well," said the Scarecrow, after a moment's thought, "I don't mind
much the loss of my throne, for it's a tiresome job to rule over the
Emerald City. And this crown is so heavy that it makes my head ache.
But I hope the Conquerors have no intention of injuring me, just
because I happen to be the King."

"I heard them say," remarked Tip, with some hesitation, "that
they intend to make a rag carpet of your outside and stuff their
sofa-cushions with your inside."

"Then I am really in danger," declared his Majesty, positively, "and it
will be wise for me to consider a means to escape."

"Where can you go?" asked Jack Pumpkinhead.

"Why, to my friend the Tin Woodman, who rules over the Winkies, and
calls himself their Emperor," was the answer. "I am sure he will
protect me."

[Illustration]

Tip was looking out of the window.

"The palace is surrounded by the enemy," said he. "It is too late to
escape. They would soon tear you to pieces."

The Scarecrow sighed.

"In an emergency," he announced, "it is always a good thing to pause
and reflect. Please excuse me while I pause and reflect."

"But we also are in danger," said the Pumpkinhead, anxiously. "If any
of these girls understand cooking, my end is not far off!"

"Nonsense!" exclaimed the Scarecrow; "they're too busy to cook, even if
they know how!"

"But should I remain here a prisoner for any length of time," protested
Jack, "I'm liable to spoil."

"Ah! then you would not be fit to associate with," returned the
Scarecrow. "The matter is more serious than I suspected."

"You," said the Pumpkinhead, gloomily, "are liable to live for many
years. My life is necessarily short. So I must take advantage of the
few days that remain to me."

"There, there! Don't worry," answered the Scarecrow, soothingly; "if
you'll keep quiet long enough for me to think, I'll try to find some
way for us all to escape."

So the others waited in patient silence while the Scarecrow walked to
a corner and stood with his face to the wall for a good five minutes.
At the end of that time he faced them with a more cheerful expression
upon his painted face.

"Where is the Saw-Horse you rode here?" he asked the Pumpkinhead.

"Why, I said he was a jewel, and so your man locked him up in the royal
treasury," said Jack.

"It was the only place I could think of, your Majesty," added the
Soldier, fearing he had made a blunder.

"It pleases me very much," said the Scarecrow. "Has the animal been
fed?"

"Oh, yes; I gave him a heaping peck of sawdust."

"Excellent!" cried the Scarecrow. "Bring the horse here at once."

The Soldier hastened away, and presently they heard the clattering
of the horse's wooden legs upon the pavement as he was led into the
courtyard.

His Majesty regarded the steed critically.

"He doesn't seem especially graceful," he remarked, musingly; "but I
suppose he can run?"

"He can, indeed," said Tip, gazing upon the Saw-Horse admiringly.

"Then, bearing us upon his back, he must make a dash through the ranks
of the rebels and carry us to my friend the Tin Woodman," announced the
Scarecrow.

"He can't carry four!" objected Tip.

"No, but he may be induced to carry three," said his Majesty. "I shall
therefore leave my Royal Army behind. For, from the ease with which he
was conquered, I have little confidence in his powers."

"Still, he can run," declared Tip, laughing.

"I expected this blow," said the Soldier, sulkily; "but I can bear it.
I shall disguise myself by cutting off my lovely green whiskers. And,
after all, it is no more dangerous to face those reckless girls than to
ride this fiery, untamed wooden horse!"

"Perhaps you are right," observed his Majesty. "But, for my part, not
being a soldier, I am fond of danger. Now, my boy, you must mount
first. And please sit as close to the horse's neck as possible."

Tip climbed quickly to his place, and the Soldier and the Scarecrow
managed to hoist the Pumpkinhead to a seat just behind him. There
remained so little space for the King that he was liable to fall off as
soon as the horse started.

"Fetch a clothesline," said the King to his Army, "and tie us all
together. Then if one falls off we will all fall off."

And while the Soldier was gone for the clothesline his Majesty
continued, "it is well for me to be careful, for my very existence is
in danger."