CHAPTER I

                    THE MAKING OF A NEWSPAPER STORY


It was a few minutes of eleven o’clock at night. One of the many
editions of the great New York _Herald_ had just gone to press. But in
the big, half-lit room where editors, copy readers, reporters and
telegraph operators were busy on the later editions to follow, there was
no let-up in the work of making a world-known newspaper.

There was the noise of many persons working swiftly; the staccato of
typewriters, the drone of telegraph sounders and now and then the sharp
inquiry of some bent-over copy reader as he struggled to turn
reportorial inexperience into a finished story. But there was no
confusion and none of the wild rush and clatter that fiction uses in
describing newspaper offices; copy boys were not dashing in all
directions and the floor was not knee deep with newspapers and print
paper.

Calmest of all was the night city editor. With a mind full of the work
already done and in progress, he was as alert mentally as if he had just
reached his desk. Five hours yet remained in which New York had to be
watched; five hours, in any one minute of which the biggest news on hand
might fade into nothing in the face of the one big story that every
editor waits for night after night. And the night city editor, knowing
this, dropped his half-lit pipe when his desk telephone buzzed.

“Stewart? Yes! Yes!” he answered quickly in a voice so low that not even
his busy assistants heard him. “Where are you? What are you doing?”

“In Newark,” came the quick response, “and we landed it. It’s a peach.
That aeroplane tip you know. It panned out all right.”

The night city editor had seemed perplexed for a few moments but at this
his face cleared.

“How big? What’s new?”

“Biggest airship ever made; biggest planes; biggest engines—cabin and
staterooms; two hundred miles an hour—”

“See it yourself?”

“Been workin’ in the factory three days; American Aeroplane Works; got
story cinched. Machine flew to-night first time. It’s a beat.”

“Got talks?”

“Not straight, but I’ve heard ’em talkin’.”

“What’s the idea? Is it a war ship?”

“Got everything but that. Will some one take it by phone? I can get to
the office quarter after twelve; got some stuff ready.”

“Who’s back of it? Whose machine is it?”

“Aerial Utilities Company; those Chicago boys, Napier and Hope and their
friends.”

The editor thought a moment, glanced at the clock on the wall where the
hands pointed to eleven and then said:

“If you can be here by a quarter after twelve, hurry in. If you can’t
make it, phone. Get up all the stuff you can. Are Napier and Hope at the
factory?”

“They made a test to-night. I know where they went. I was outside the
yard. They were gone from ten o’clock till ten twenty-five; were all
over New York and forty miles to sea. It—”

“Grab the eleven fifty express and hustle in,” interrupted the man at
the telephone. “It’s good stuff and’ll stand a couple o’ columns.”

Hanging up the receiver, the night city editor settled back in his
chair, finished lighting his pipe and then, his head leaning in his
clasped hands, seemed to be in a reverie. But this did not last long.
While he had talked to “Stewart in Newark” three young men had hurried
to his desk and laid on it stories or parts of stories on which they had
been working. These reporters were now standing a few feet away awaiting
further orders or dismissal for the night.

“Dick,” exclaimed the editor as he suddenly unclasped his hands, leaned
forward over his desk again and shuffled the copy on it into a little
bundle, “we’ll want about two and a half columns in the last edition.”
As he spoke, a middle-aged man in his shirt sleeves—for the night was
mid-June—leaned backward from a near-by big table at which a dozen men
were busy cutting, rewriting and pasting copy, and took the little
bundle of manuscript from his superior’s hands.

The waiting reporters groaned inwardly. They knew that this was probably
the death warrant for their own evening’s work. Dick, the man addressed,
asked nothing and made no inquiry. He knew that something big had turned
up. As head copy reader the securing of this “something” was no business
of his. Nor did the nature of it stir his calloused curiosity. His
orders were to save two and a half columns of space and this he would
do. When the story came, he and his assistants would see that it was two
and a half columns long and no more.

But this was not the attitude of the three reporters yet waiting near
the editor’s desk. This man was no longer in a reverie. In those few
minutes he had “blocked out” his big story; he already saw it in print
and, unlike Dick, he was now ready to go after it.

“Anything more, Mr. Latimer?” asked one of the reporters eagerly, for
each of them had now scented a “beat” and all, forgetting the probable
fate of their earlier evening’s work, were eager to be in on it.

Mr. Latimer arose and without reply hurried away in the direction of the
night editor’s desk. When he returned, his pipe now sputtering
viciously, he called: “Dick, make that two columns.” Then he turned
toward the still lingering reporters. They moved to his desk, each
trying to attract special attention.

“Chambers,” said Mr. Latimer to the youngest of the trio, “get
Governor’s island on the phone and see if they’ll put you on Colonel
Fred Grant’s wire. If you can’t raise him by phone go down to the Ship
News office and have the boys take you over in the boat. We want a good
talk with him on this idea: What military prestige will it give the
country that is the first to perfect an airship that can travel two
hundred miles an hour—an aeroplane that can actually carry men and
bombs? Point out that this means across the Atlantic in fifteen hours.
Make him talk new stuff, practical, and cut out the Jules Verne patter.”

Chambers, young and inexperienced, hurried away without a question,
knowing well enough that this interview was to fit into another story
and that it was his business to get it, and the earlier the better.

“Glidden,” said the night city editor, turning to the oldest reporter of
the three, “didn’t you write a Sunday story a few weeks ago on ‘The
Limit of the Automobile’?”

“Yes, sir,” was the prompt reply of the pleased young journalist.

“Have you some ideas on the possibilities of the aeroplane?”

“I have,” was the prompt reply. If Glidden had gone further he would
have added, “I’m getting up another story on that line now.”

“That’s good,” broke in Mr. Latimer. “We’re going to print a big
aeroplane story in the morning. I want a ‘lead.’ The man on the story
can’t write it. I can’t tell you anything except that this story
concerns the first real airship. Give me half a column of what a real
aeroplane ought to do—”

“It ought to go ten miles up in the air,” broke in Glidden impulsively
as if anxious to demonstrate that he really had some ideas, “and the
time will come when the flying machine will stay in the air more than
five days. It will carry fifty people, cross the Atlantic or Pacific and
sail two hundred miles an hour—”

“That’s enough,” laughed the editor. “Our machine does two hundred
miles. Go to it.”

Glidden, who should have had Stewart’s assignment on the aeroplane
story, wanted to ask more but he was too wise to do so. A few minutes
later he was back at his typewriter, nervous and excited over the part
he was to take in the making of the next morning’s “beat.”

The work of the third man was better known to Mr. Latimer.

“Winton,” he began as if sure that his orders would be carried out to
the letter, “you’ve heard of the Airship Boys—those Chicago youngsters
who have been starring in aeronautics for several years?”

“I know Bob Russell personally,” answered Winton. “He’s the newspaper
man from Kansas City who has been with the boys in all their stunts.”

“Did he ever work in New York?” inquired Mr. Latimer.

“I think not. I believe he’s in business with the Airship Boys. Used to
work on the Kansas City _Comet_.”

“Couldn’t get hold of him?”

“If it’s about some new project of these boys,” laughed Winton, “it’s
not worth while. They’re all clams concerning their own affairs.”

“But is this the outfit that interested Mr. Morgan in the Universal
Transportation Company last summer?”

“I never worked on the story except once when I tried to get Russell to
talk and couldn’t. They had a suite of offices in the Waldorf last
July.”

“Call the Waldorf and see what you can find.”

Five minutes later Winton was back at Mr. Latimer’s desk.

“Five or six persons connected with the Aerial Utilities Company had
apartments and offices in the hotel until the middle of last August.
Then the offices were moved to Chicago. There seems to be a group of
these people, all interested in aeroplanes on a big scale and their
headquarters I think are in Chicago.”

Mr. Latimer touched a button and hastily wrote a note.

“Hand this to the telegraph editor,” he said to the messenger as he gave
him this message:

“_Craig, Tribune, Chicago. Rush anything on Aerial Utilities Company,
organization and business. Also matter concerning Airship Boys, Napier,
Hope and Russell._”

Then he turned to Winton again.

“Story in to-night about those boys and a big aeroplane. Napier and Hope
and maybe Russell are not in Chicago, but somewhere in Newark. Their
newest idea was manufactured by the American Aeroplane Company in
Newark. Call the works on a chance; like as not you won’t find any one
there. Look up the head of the company. Raise him on the phone. If he
won’t talk about the new airship make him tell you where the Airship
Boys are. Try the hotels by phone. Must have something about these young
men. The man on the story missed a talk with ’em.”

Winton rushed to the telephone room and Mr. Latimer, with another glance
at the clock, put the Newark “beat” aside for a moment while he gave his
attention to the accumulating copy received from the local news bureau
and late evening assignment men. With instructions for each, he had
“covered” an East Side tenement fire by rushing four men to the scene
and had personally called up and talked to a leading financier on a
financial story when Winton returned.

“J. W. Atkinson is president of the Aeroplane Company,” Winton reported.
“No one at works. Got Atkinson on phone. He won’t talk but acknowledges
Airship Boys are in Newark. Won’t say where. Can’t find ’em at hotels.”

Without answering, the night city editor turned to his telephone.

“Get me the Newark office,” he ordered. “Nathan, if he’s there. Go to
the library,” he added, speaking to Winton, “and dig up a story on these
kids. There’s plenty there. Get half a column. See if we have any
pictures.”

While Winton hurried away on his new task, the telephone rang.

“Newark?” asked Mr. Latimer. “Is that Nathan?”

“Mr. Nathan’s out eatin’ supper,” replied a juvenile voice.

“Go get him. Tell him this. Ready? Put down J. W. Atkinson. Got it? J.
W. Atkinson, president American Aeroplane Company. Tell Nathan to see
Mr. Atkinson at his home and find where Ned Napier and Alan Hope can be
found. Put the names down: Ned Napier and Alan Hope.”

“I know ’em,” interrupted the youthful voice. “Them’s the Airship Boys.”

“Tell Nathan not to leave Mr. Atkinson until he learns where those boys
are stopping: where they are in Newark. Got it?”

These events had taken place within fifteen minutes. At ten minutes
after eleven Mr. Latimer again put the Newark story aside temporarily
and gave all his time to rounding up his part of the next edition. At
eleven thirty o’clock Glidden, who was to provide the material for a
general “lead” to the big “beat”—none of the details of which he even
knew, turned in five hundred words. Mr. Latimer paused in his other work
and glanced hastily at the pages. Then he looked at the clock, leaned
back in his chair and read each page.

“Good stuff,” he announced without even a smile as he finished. “That’s
the idea; just what I wanted. Stewart is coming in from Newark with the
story a quarter after twelve. Get your supper and be back by that time.
I want you to help him shape up his stuff. Chambers and Winton will have
‘adds’ to the story.”

A quarter of an hour later Winton reported with his sketch of the
Airship Boys. His superior did not read the matter—he was sure enough of
Winton—but spiked it with Glidden’s copy.

“No pictures,” explained the reporter, “except one in the _Scientific
American_ of last July showing working drawings of a steel monoplane—the
one they used in the New York-Chicago flight.”

“Get it and take it to the picture man. Tell him to make a two-column
cut of it. No pictures of the young men?”

“Not on file.”

“That’s good,” said Mr. Latimer with his first smile of the evening.
“It’ll make a good ‘follow’ to-morrow. By the way, did you get a story
of these youngsters right up to date?”

“No,” answered the reporter, somewhat regretfully, “I couldn’t find
anything about them after their record flight in a steel monoplane
between New York and Chicago last July. I know they were in New York at
their Waldorf offices until August. But I can’t find anything about them
since that date. If they’ve got a new idea, they’ve had since last
August to work on it unmolested by the newspapers.”

Mr. Latimer was shaking his head as he refilled his pipe.

“Get your supper and hurry back. Stewart’ll be here in fifteen or twenty
minutes. Then we’ll see what we can all do to find out what they’ve been
doing since August. The story is gettin’ to look good.”

Winton was about to hasten away when his interest got the better of his
judgment and he violated one of the unwritten rules of the _Herald_
office: he questioned his superior.

“I know it isn’t my business, Mr. Latimer,” he began, hesitatingly, “but
didn’t Stewart say they have made a new machine that can fly two hundred
miles an hour?”

The night city editor nodded his head.

“And he has the details of the machine?”

“All of them,” replied the editor. “But he’s missed the main thing—the
story. What are they going to do with such a craft? Why should they test
it out in secret—under cover of night?”

“And that’s what we are trying to find out?” asked Winton, showing
confusion.

“Certainly,” was the response. “The mere account of a new aeroplane
isn’t worth two columns in the _Herald_. That’s only half the story. Its
purpose and possibility make the real story.”

Winton leaned over the desk, his face flushed.

“I know what those boys have done in the past,” he said in a low voice.
“There’s only one thing left for them to do now. If you can’t find them
and don’t know what that is I’ll make a guess for you: they’re going to
cross the Atlantic.”

“Certainly,” was Mr. Latimer’s response. “My own idea precisely. And
that is the story the _Herald_ is going to print in the morning.”

But the night city editor was wrong. The _Herald_ did not print such a
story in the morning, as will be set forth in the next chapter.




                               CHAPTER II

                    WHAT A REPORTER SAW IN THE DARK


Stewart, the reporter who had been working in the American Aeroplane
Company’s plant for several days and who had telephoned the tip on the
first flight of the wonderful new machine, reached the _Herald_ office a
few minutes ahead of his schedule. He was hot and excited. As he hurried
to Mr. Latimer’s desk he drew from his pocket a wad of copy—a part of
his story already prepared. The night city editor looked at the clock—he
seemed always watching the clock.

“Twelve ten,” Mr. Latimer began without question or comment and waving
back the proffered manuscript. “We want a column. Take an hour and do it
right. Tell what you saw—don’t speculate. Tell about the new machine,
and don’t be technical. We’ll make the ‘lead’ when we see what you’ve
got—”

“This is ready now,” interrupted Stewart, mopping his brow. “I did it on
the train.”

“Use it in your story; put it together yourself. It’s for the last
edition. By the way, you didn’t find what they’re going to do with the
new airship?”

“Everything but that,” confessed Stewart. “No one in the factory seems
to know. But it seems to me that they’ll certainly use it first to cut
down the time on that New York-Chicago airship line. Four or five hours
to Chicago would be quite a card.”

“Why not fifteen hours across the Atlantic?” asked Mr. Latimer with a
significant twinkle in his eyes.

“You’re right,” exclaimed Stewart. “I hadn’t thought of that. Say,
that’s great; first airship across the ocean. Sure! They can do it.
That’s the idea. That’s my ‘lead’—”

The night city editor raised his hand.

“Don’t bother about the ‘lead.’ Do what I told you: write what you saw
and a description of the machine. And you might start right away if you
like.”

Stewart, coat off and pipe going, was just well into his story when
Chambers reported from Governor’s Island. He had seen Colonel Grant.

“But,” explained the reporter to Mr. Latimer over the telephone, “he
said it was too late to talk to-night. He’s offered to prepare a
statement for me to-morrow.”

“What did he say to-night?” snapped the night city editor.

“Well, he said America ought to be proud of its advance in aeronautics;
that there were great possibilities in aerial navigation—”

“Yes,” broke in Mr. Latimer, “but did you think to mention what I told
you to ask him? What military prestige it would give a country to own
the first aeroplane that could fly two hundred miles an hour?”

“Yes, sir,” was the prompt answer, “but he said he’d rather not be
quoted on that.”

“What was it?”

“He said he rather thought it might give prestige to any one of the
great nations and that if America had such a ship that it ought to keep
it and not let some European government snap it up. He said, as a
nation, he thought we were rather behind the other powers in the
development of the airship in a military and naval way.”

“Did you promise not to quote him?”

“No, sir. But—”

“Glidden,” called Mr. Latimer to that young man, who had just returned,
“here’s Chambers on the wire at Governor’s Island. He’s had a talk with
Colonel Grant: hot stuff about neglect of government to develop airships
for naval and military purposes: thinks our new aeroplane gives us
balance of power among the big nations. Take it and get up a good story
on it. Here’s Glidden, Chambers,” he continued, turning to the telephone
again, “he’ll take your stuff.”

A moment later Glidden was at a desk and the waiting Chambers had been
switched to him. With almost one movement the more experienced Glidden
caught up the receiver and, with a piece of paper rescued from the floor
and a stub of a pencil borrowed from a man next to him, was ready.

“Shoot it, Chambers,” was his salutation and the interview was under
way.

Several pages of Stewart’s story had now reached Mr. Latimer’s desk.
Before he gave it his attention, he took up Winton’s matter on the
Airship Boys and glanced hurriedly through it. This apparently called
for no comment and he passed it at once to Dick, the head copy reader.

“Here’s the first of that two-column story for the last edition. It’s
the last ‘add.’ Use all of it. There’ll be a talk with Colonel Fred
Grant to follow the main story.”

Dick shuffled the sheets together without a glance at the words on them,
spiked the pages on a spindle, readjusted his pipe and raised his green
eye shade.

“Who’s writin’ the story?” was his only response.

“Stewart,” said Mr. Latimer.

“A cub?” grunted Dick as he looked at the watch on the blotter before
him. Then he jerked his head to show the contempt all old copy readers
feel for inexperienced reporters. “It’s twelve thirty,” he added as a
part of his groan.

“He may not be a cub after to-night,” was Mr. Latimer’s tart rejoinder
as he at last tackled Stewart’s copy.

“At ten twenty o’clock last night,” Stewart’s story began, “an airship
that is undoubtedly destined to make the first flight across the
Atlantic ocean, was given a secret test from the yards of the American
Aeroplane Company’s plant in South Newark.

“That the experimental flight was successful in every way is attested by
the fact that this newest and most complete aeroplane was in the air
twenty-five minutes and attained a speed of between 180 and 200 miles an
hour. The flight was cloaked in mystery and the only spectators were the
inventors and owners of the airship, the superintendent and the
president of the Aeroplane Company and a reporter for the _Herald_.

“While every effort has been made to keep any intelligence of the new
marvel from reaching the public at the present time, the record breaking
test made last night was observed and timed. This mechanical,
sky-piercing meteor was driven by man thirty or forty miles out to sea
and, concealed by the shadows of night, it returned successfully and
unseen directly over the skyscrapers of New York.”

Without reading further Mr. Latimer reached for a pad of copy paper, a
pencil and his shears. In a few minutes Stewart’s carefully prepared
story had been transformed by scissors, paste pot, interlineations and
new lines into this:

“This mechanical sky-piercing meteor last night set what may be the
ultimate record for man’s aerial flight. Three miles in sixty seconds or
one hundred and eighty miles an hour, is the last proof of man’s
complete conquest of the air. With London but fifteen hours from New
York, the crossing of the Atlantic is assured. And, in the language of
Colonel Fred Grant, ‘this assures the superiority of the United States
as a naval power.’

“This new marvel was given its initial test last night. At ten twenty
o’clock the airship that is destined to revolutionize aeronautics, rose
mysteriously from the yards of the American Aeroplane Company’s plant in
South Newark. Within the next twenty-five minutes it had darted forty
miles straight out to sea and then, concealed by the shadows of night,
returned successfully and unseen, directly over the sleeping skyscrapers
of lower New York.

“This historic flight, cloaked in darkness, was made with no spectators
other than the inventors and owners of the airship, the superintendent
and the president of the aeroplane works and a reporter for the
_Herald_. While every effort had been made to keep intelligence of the
wonderful invention from the public at the present time, an account of
the secret test as well as a complete description of the aeroplane
itself, is given herewith in detail.”

By the time the copy boy had laid Stewart’s next batch of copy on the
night city editor’s desk Mr. Latimer had passed all of the first “take,”
marked “lead to come,” over to Dick, the head copy reader, and the big
aeroplane “beat” was on its way into print. Few changes were made in the
rest of Stewart’s story. Having finished his first few pages and reached
the real narrative, he wrote rapidly and easily.

The inexperienced young reporter had done his work well. For several
days he had been in the service of the Aeroplane Company as a common
workman in the yards. In that time, with his eyes open and by skillful
questioning, he had succeeded in striking up an acquaintance with one of
the skilled enginemen working on the new car. From this man he had
wormed the general details of the aircraft and learned that a test of
the completed aeroplane was to be made.

These things were not told in his story but he did describe graphically
and in a way that made Mr. Latimer nod his head in approval, everything
to be seen by the eye from the time the great tandem-planed sky vehicle
was rolled out into the yard and lifted itself cloudward until it sank
in the same spot again twenty-five minutes later.

When those pages of his story reached the desk Mr. Latimer rose and
hurried to the busy writer’s side.

“How did you know they were going to pull this off to-night?” he asked.

“I didn’t. But I guessed it would be at night. I meant to watch each
night—”

“Where were you?”

“On the roof.”

“You’re doing very well. Good stuff,” was his superior’s comment. “Get
it in a column.”

There wasn’t a great deal that the young reporter could write of the
actual flight. The ship-like structure had been wheeled out of the gloom
of the canvas-sided setting-up room into the yellow glare of half a
dozen yard torches. It rumbled heavily—more like a heavy truck than the
flimsy airships Stewart had seen. Then, for some minutes, several
persons had passed back and forth by means of a step ladder into an
enclosed part of the great, metallic-glinting structure. From the lights
that flared up and died out in the big torches he knew that his first
night’s vigil was to be rewarded with something.

“At ten fifteen o’clock,” he described in his story, “only a vast
expanse of metal, cables and truss could be seen vaguely as those busy
about the towering superstructure moved a torch or climbed into or out
of the mammoth enclosed frame. Just before ten twenty o’clock an engine
started suddenly somewhere within the ship-like body of the winged
wonder. A little later, a brief burst of light within the central
enclosure threw into sudden view two rows of flashing portholes. Like
the bow of a miniature ocean steamer, the front of the shadowy structure
stood, for a moment, clearly defined in the night.

“Halfway up the side of the vessel extended a railing-protected gallery
that indicated two decks. Along the lower of these ran a second gallery.
The forward part of the upper deck was plainly a pilot house, from the
rounded front of which, through two small heavily glassed openings, shot
antennaelike feelers of light into the black factory yard. Behind this
section the skeletonlike gallery led astern along what were apparently
three more rooms. Passing these, the gallery ascended the rounded side
of the giant car and disappeared sternward in the form of a protected
path or bridge. The front of the lower deck resembled the dark hold of a
freight vessel. In the rear, a door opening from this gallery revealed,
through a glare of light, an engine room, now the center of much
activity.

“Herein two young men hung over a puzzle of levers, wheels and valves
while a third was just climbing into the gallery by means of a drop
ladder or landing stage.

“‘What’s the use of all this illumination?’ called the young man just
mounting the machine. ‘Why not send out cards?’ he added, laughing.

“One of the boys in the engine room stuck his head outside, glanced
about and chuckled. As he disappeared within again, there was a snap and
the lights outlining the air machine turned black. Then came the renewed
sound of feet hurrying back and forth on metal runways; doors opened and
closed and, where deck lights had flooded the strange craft, only the
thin rays of electric hand torches indicated persons moving about. One
of several men on the ground below now made his way up the ladder to the
landing stage and by this to the lower deck gallery, where two of the
moving lights were suddenly focussed. Words passed in low tones and, in
a few moments, the glow of a green-shaded light appeared through the
suddenly reopened door of the pilot house.

“Almost at the same time, but from the distant offices of the aeroplane
factory, broke out the staccato of a wireless sender in operation. Those
on the lower gallery waited in silence until a voice called from the
pilot house:

“‘All right, Ned; fine and dandy; the operator says _success and
speed_.’

“‘Good,’ was the quick response. ‘Come on down, Bob; we’re off.’

“As the light in the pilot cabin winked out, the same voice continued,
‘Good-bye, Mr. Osborne. We’ll be back in half an hour. Stay by the
wireless. We’ll keep in touch with you every few minutes.’ ‘Good-bye,’
called another voice and then the man who had just mounted the landing
ladder made his way quickly to the ground.”

When Stewart’s account of the aeroplane test had reached this point,
Dick, the copy reader, shuffled the pages of the last “take” like a deck
of cards and snorted.

“This is fine,” he said, with a despairing look, addressing Mr. Latimer,
“but I thought he was goin’ to tell something. Here’s six hundred words
and he hasn’t got anywhere yet—”

“Let it stand,” was Mr. Latimer’s snappy order. “It’s good stuff.”

“Simultaneously,” continued Stewart’s story, “the sound of the engine in
operation deepened into an almost inaudible note. Then this was doubled
as if a second power had been put in operation. A shaded light shone in
the engine room and the pilot house door opened and closed. There was
the _tap-tap_ of swift footsteps on the lower gallery, one of those
aboard sprang up the steps to the top gallery and then a light flashed
at intervals along the ladderlike runway on the rear truss. Some one was
inspecting the shadowy bridge.

“Far in the rear the hurrying figure dropped through what seemed a small
manhole in the truss frame. Half within the tapering, spiderlike
construction the person appeared to press a button. There was a sharp
buzz in the pilot cabin. Then the figure with the light ran swiftly
forward inside the hollow frame of the tail of the airship and
disappeared through a self-closing door into the engine cabin.

“Two powerful engines were apparently in full operation. There was the
sound of a quick voice in the engine room as if someone were shouting
through a tube.

“‘All ready here and astern, Ned,’ could be distinguished. Then, at the
resonant single tap of a gong in reply, powerful clutches must have been
instantly applied. The aeroplane’s propellers began their wide sweep.
Faster and faster they moved, until, as the closed engine room door
opened once more and one of the young men passed out onto the gallery,
the wide-reaching metal bird suddenly sprang forward. But it was only
for a short distance. Within fifty feet, it lifted in the air and, once
off the ground, its bow darted skyward like the beak of a frightened
bird.

“‘Don’t forget your lights!’ yelled the figure on the gallery as the
airship swept upward, ‘and keep the wireless goin’.’ While he was
speaking the swift propellers had already carried the car beyond
hearing.”




                              CHAPTER III

                THE VETERAN TAKES OFF HIS HAT TO THE CUB


The rest of reporter Stewart’s story of the mysterious airship flight,
together with his elaborate account of the construction of the aeroplane
as it had been described to him, ran much over a column. Old Dick, the
copy reader, groaned and even Mr. Latimer began to wonder how he was to
get his “beat” into two columns without “killing” Chamber’s “talk” with
Colonel Grant, Winton’s account of the Airship Boys or Glidden’s “lead.”

The latter Mr. Latimer had already thrown out conditionally but he was
determined to use the interview and the account of the earlier
adventures of the daring boys. There could be only one solution of the
difficulty: he must have more space if he had to choke it out of the
night editor. Meanwhile, he began to put some pressure on the wordy
reporter.

“It’s good stuff, old man,” he said to the perspiring reporter as the
latter pounded his typewriter, “but you know this isn’t a magazine and
other things have happened to-night.”

Stewart was only a beginner. As yet he knew only a part of a reporter’s
trade. He could write but he hadn’t learned how to tell it in a “stick.”
The editorial admonition fell on him with little effect. He seemed
unable to omit any detail. Page after page came from his machine to tell
how for twenty-five minutes the four or five men in the Aeroplane
Company yards waited for the return of the flying car.

He told how a movable searchlight was stationed at the landing place and
how the watchers then betook themselves to the wireless office of the
works. With good judgment he refrained from telling how he concealed
himself just without an open window, and one reading his narrative might
conclude that the prying reporter was a guest of the watchful group.

Some of the messages from the moving aeroplane he heard and of these he
told. Most of them he missed, as his vantage point was somewhat removed.
He could tell that the busy wireless operator was in almost constant
communication with “Bob” on the airship. But the most important message
he did hear, because when it came the excited operator repeated it as if
reading a bulletin to anxious thousands.

“_On board Ocean Flyer_,” he read, “_10.24 P. M. Estimate forty miles
from Newark at sea. Big steamer beneath. Turning. Better time returning.
Look out. Bob Russell._”

It required but a moment’s calculation when he heard this to make
Stewart gasp with amazement. At that rate the _Ocean Flyer_ was doing
one hundred and eighty miles an hour. Not even this speed had been
predicted by his talkative fellow workman. And at this rate he knew that
the marvelous airship might be expected in the Aeroplane Company yards
again by ten forty-five o’clock.

The reporter made his plans at once. He knew that it was both futile and
inadvisable, if he was to attempt to score his news “beat,” to wait in
an attempt to interview either the Airship Boys on the aeroplane or to
get more exact particulars from the Aeroplane Company officials.
Therefore, making his way out of the yards, he hurried along switch
tracks until he was in the vicinity of the street car terminal.

With watch in hand, he waited in the suburban stillness and gloom while
he searched the eastern sky. He knew the _Ocean Flyer_ carried no
outside signal yet he hoped for a possible glimpse of the shaded green
pilot or engine room light. More than once he fancied he could hear the
peculiar low note of the big craft’s engines. And all the time he kept
an eye on the vertical shaft of the searchlight at the works, for by
this beacon he knew the returning craft must guide itself to a safe
landing. But neither sound nor returning light could he detect. When it
was exactly a quarter of eleven o’clock he began to regret his attempt
to save time and was debating the advisability of returning to the
plant. In doubt, he was aware suddenly of a new note in the hum of the
mosquitoes and other marsh things about him. Was it mosquitoes or was it
the hum of the unseen airship? The sound ceased suddenly. Almost
immediately the shaft of the warning searchlight swept earthward and
disappeared.

Instinctively the nervous reporter glanced at his watch. It was a few
seconds of ten forty-six. A trolley car was just starting. With a gulp
of exultation the happy Stewart dashed forward and flipped the car. He
knew that the _Ocean Flyer_ had made a successful flight and had safely
returned. He knew also the distance it had traveled and the time it had
taken to do it. His only object was now to call his office by telephone
and deliver the story. All these details his rapidly written copy told
later, omitting the personal part. When it was complete a column of
matter was on Mr. Latimer’s desk.

As Stewart noticed the number of his last page and realized how much he
had written, he paused aghast. The bigger part of his story was yet to
come—all the details of the ingenious creation remained to be written.
Frightened by his failure to obey orders he hastened to Mr. Latimer’s
desk. Here, three tired and nervous men, with the marks of a night’s
grinding work on their faces and linen—unlit pipes or half consumed,
fireless cigars gripped in their set teeth—were gathered in sullen
debate.

“There’s two columns of it now and more to come,” the night editor was
saying decisively. “We can’t give you another inch.”

Mr. Latimer saw Stewart approaching.

“How much more of that story is there?” he asked appealingly.

“A column, I think.”

The night city editor sighed and the telegraph editor laughed
sarcastically.

“Any one who can see three columns in an airship story to-day must have
forgotten they’re already back numbers,” exclaimed this executive.

“Lift a column of cable rot,” suggested the night city editor. “This
can’t be cut; it’s a big story and it’s a ‘beat’.”

“Give him the paper,” went on the telegraph editor wearily.

“You’ll have to get along with two columns,” answered the night editor,
“unless you think the paper is elastic or that we ought to have another
page.”

Mr. Latimer slapped the desk with the last “take” of Stewart’s copy.

“You fellows don’t know news when you see it. What does the average
reader care about English elections and French champagne riots? Every
man and boy in the United States is interested in aeroplanes. And this
story tells about the final thing in airships. It’ll be read all over
the world to-morrow. It’s big, I tell you, and worth a page—”

“That’s what they all say,” sneered the telegraph editor.

“And I’m goin’ to print it all—every word of it—if I have to take it up
to the old man himself.”

“That’s your cue,” broke in the night editor as he excitedly attempted
to relight his dead cigar. “That’s where you’ll have to go. You don’t
get but two columns from me.”

“It’s twenty minutes after one o’clock,” remarked a sour voice from the
near-by copy reader’s desk. “If there’s any more of that Newark stuff
you’d better hump it along.”

Without replying, the night city editor tossed old Dick the last of
Stewart’s story describing the departure and return of the Airship Boys’
newest wonder and then arose with fire in his eyes.

“Give me all you can write up to two fifteen,” he snapped to Stewart,
“and—” Just then his telephone rang.

“Yes,” he answered in a tired voice while the telegraph and night
editors yet lingered by his desk. “Nathan? You seem to have taken plenty
of time for your supper. Well? Oh, they did. All right. You don’t know
where they are stopping? Good-bye.” Then he arose and glared once more
at his nightly enemies—the telegraph and night editors. “Winton,” he
called sharply to that reporter, who was sitting near by with his feet
on a table. “These Airship Boys left Newark on the express just after
Stewart. Nathan says they’re in town. Take a flyer through the hotels.
Land ’em if possible. Make ’em talk. Phone me if you locate them.”

“’S that mean more of this flyin’ machine stuff?” grunted the head copy
reader.

“It means I’m attending to my own business,” retorted Mr. Latimer, and
with no further word or look for his office associates, he walked
hurriedly toward the door. As the sailor “goes to the mast” or to the
captain of the ship in a last appeal against unfairness or injustice,
Mr. Latimer was on his way to the “old man” or the managing editor on
his customary protest against the machinations of the night editor.
Stewart hastened to his typewriter and resumed his tale of the
aeroplane.

“The problem of how to build an aeroplane large enough to carry
passengers hundreds of miles—possibly across the Atlantic—and at the
same time develop speed enough to hold its own against storms, seemed
unsolvable until two discoveries were made last winter. Both of these
are now well known to scientists and both are unknown as yet to the
layman. It was the almost simultaneous discovery of the new metal
magnalium (due to the development of the electric converter by the steel
works in Chicago) and a final determination of the law of the propeller
by Professor Montgomery of California.

“With this new magnalium it is at last possible to make an all-metal car
with light but rigid wings or planes. This metal, a magnesium alloy with
copper and standard vanadium or chrome steel, at once assumed a new
place in metals.” (These facts Stewart had secured from a German
metallurgical quarterly in the Newark Public Library.) “Magnalium is not
only extremely light but it has a molecular cohesion never before
attained. Its peculiar toughness gives it a capacity for being worked
slowly that is ideal for aeroplane uses. It turns the edge of the
hardest chisel driven against it, yet the same drill, under slow
pressure, will cleave it almost as easily as aluminum.”

Marking this much of his new story “more,” to indicate to the copy
readers that more was to come, and heading his next page “Add 1
Description Aeroplane,” Stewart rushed the prepared “take” of copy to
the city editor’s desk and continued:

“It is from this new metal that the car, planes and truss of the _Ocean
Flyer_ are constructed. The aeroplane is modeled in general after the
body and wings of a gull in full flight, insuring, by its peculiar
construction, not only the greatest speed, but, by an ingenious
adaptation of the same gull’s wing, the automatic stability long striven
for by aeroplane builders.”

[Illustration:

  IN THE “LOCAL ROOM” OF THE NEW YORK HERALD.
]

“Three sets of follow or tandem planes project, with slight dihedral
angles, for from eighty to forty feet on each side of the body of the
craft, a wing width never before attained. Yet, in flight, the enormous
craft is readily held aloft, with all its load, by wings that are no
more than seven and one-half feet in chord—from front to trailing edge.
Although it will be incomprehensible to many how such small lifting
surface can elevate such a heavy structure, this becomes apparent when
the airship is seen at rest. The moment the air pressure due to rapid
flight is lessened to a certain point by descent or cessation of motion,
the narrow wing surfaces automatically spread till they are twenty-one
feet from front to back.”

Glidden, the only airship man in the office, who covered all the
aviation “stunts,” had long since finished his interview and was now
lounging on the desk next to Stewart’s.

“Great!” was his comment, as he read this part of the story page by
page. “Some one is strong with the Jules Verne stuff. Go to it, kid.”

The busy Stewart scarcely heard him.

“This was accomplished,” went on the young reporter, shouting for a copy
boy and hustling to the desk another section of the story that was
destined never to be printed, “in a simple manner. Near the leading edge
of each wing is installed one of the new German pressure gauges with
small openings just under the dipping edge. These small appliances, of
compact construction, are easily concealed in the depth of the wing.
Ordinarily these powerful gauges operate a needle to record pressure.
Those used on the planes of the _Ocean Flyer_ are made on a heavier
scale and operate directly on a spring drum. From these, light cables
extend to movable sections of the wings.

“These movable sections of the planes, the first unique feature of the
new airship, telescope within and without the standard sections of the
wings. By means of the gauge and spring drums they are extended
automatically when the machine is not in swift flight. When the craft
has made an ascent and attained a speed sufficient to create a vacuum
under the dipping or front edge of the planes, the suction or reverse
pressure on the gauges allows the drums to reel in the extension
surfaces. When in full motion, as these come in, speed is naturally
increased and all the extensions are housed securely beneath or over the
main section of the wing.”

“How about the wing trusses?” broke in the skeptical Glidden.

“Corrugated rigidity,” replied Stewart promptly, remembering the phrase
he had heard applied to the long, untrussed wings.

“The first section or extension,” his story continued, “running in its
grooves, so closely overlaps the outside of the main section as to
appear to be its proper covering. The rear section, with separate
leaves, like the feathers of a bird’s wing, likewise disappears, leaving
only the long narrow wing which has always been the ideal speed machine.

“To drive this huge craft, whose body consists of two stories or decks
with pilot house, staterooms, fuel chambers, engine room, bridges above
and protective galleries, a much higher percentage of motor power than
ever secured before had to be turned into propulsive energy. The waste,
or ‘slip’ of the ordinary propellers not only allowed a great deal of
the motor’s power to escape, but it applied the remaining power so far
from the shaft of the propeller that the resultant leverage greatly
reduced the actual thrust.” (As Stewart finished this sentence, after
several pauses and corrections, he turned the page over to Glidden with
some pride. Then he paused while the older reporter read it.)

“Is that right?” asked Stewart with a curious smile.

“Absolutely,” answered Glidden. “What’s next?”

Stewart’s typewriter began clicking again.

“The new French ‘moon propeller’ does away with this ‘slip’ and allows
the full power of the engine to be applied advantageously. Viewed
sidewise this new form of propeller looks exactly like the new moon, its
tips bending ahead of its shaft attachment. Its object is to gather the
air at the outside of the circle,—”

“Periphery,” suggested Glidden, who was reading over the writer’s
shoulder. Stewart made the change and continued: “compress it in
accelerating degrees as it is forced toward the shaft and there, at the
broad, ugly-looking middle section of the blade, exert the full force of
the motor on the compressed air. The result is to increase the
efficiency of the engine by two hundred and fifty per cent. The massive,
eleven-foot propellers, with a section five feet broad at the center,
give opportunity for the application of this great force.”

“How about the engine?” exclaimed Glidden as this paragraph was
finished. His smile of skepticism was not as marked now.

“This force,” continued the younger man, “is secured by a chemical
engine in which dehydrated sulphuric ether and gasoline or either may be
used. Since the experiments with sulphuric ether, made last fall, engine
makers have watched the rapid development of this form of engine with
the greatest interest. Magnalium cylinders, sustaining the shock of the
tremendous explosions as the cylinders revolve past the exploding
chamber, have developed a power previously only dreamed of. Each of the
two huge engines used on the _Ocean Flyer_ is six feet in diameter with
four explosion chambers cooled by fans which feed liquid ammonia to the
cylinder walls in a spray and then furnish power for its liquefaction
again. In form, each engine is a great wheel or turbine on the rim of
which is a succession of conical pockets or cylinders. These are
presented to the explosion chambers, receive the impact of the explosion
and then, running through an expanding groove, allow the charge to
continue expanding and applying power till the groove ends in an open
slot which instantly cleanses the cylinders or pockets of the burnt
gases. By this arrangement there is only a twentieth part of the engine
wheel where no power is being imparted, thus giving practically a
continuous torque.”

“How’s ‘torque’?” laughed Stewart as he inserted a fresh sheet of paper
in the typewriter.

“Torque,” responded Glidden without even a smile, “is exceedingly good.
As to the rest of your mechanical details all I can say is I take off my
hat to you and whoever handed you this. It is exceedingly warm.”

“The joke of it all,” commented the other reporter, who was not without
his own sense of humor, “is that these absurdities all happen to be
practicalities. There’s a little more.”

“Weighing 520 pounds each,” continued Stewart, “and with a speed of
1,500 revolutions a minute, these big turbines generate 972 horsepower,
natural brake test, and this may be raised to above a thousand
horsepower without danger. Revolving in opposite directions they do away
with dangerous gyroscopic action. Power is applied to the propellers by
magnalium gearing. These are geared up, instead of down, as has always
been the practice, and the new ‘moon propellers’ gain in thrust with
high speed instead of losing it. This is because of greater compression
of the air and a vacuum set up ahead of the blades by reason of their
high speed. The car itself—”

At this moment—now after two o’clock—Mr. Latimer suddenly appeared at
Stewart’s side.

“Needn’t write any more,” he said sharply. “The story isn’t going to be
printed. The managing editor wants to see you at once.”




                               CHAPTER IV

                 THE AIRSHIP BOYS MAKE THEIR APPEARANCE


To be ordered to the office of the managing editor in this summary
manner at half-past two o’clock in the morning was enough to set an
older reporter than Buck Stewart guessing—Buck because his given name
was Buckingham. Buck’s first thought was that he would now be asked to
explain why he had persisted in expanding a column story into twice that
space. Somewhat to his gratification Mr. Latimer escorted him to the
office of the head of the paper.

The young reporter had never even seen his distantly removed superior.
He had heard that the august editor looked like a preacher. He knew that
the “boss” was one of the greatest journalists in the world. Then,
instead of speculating on the cause for his summons, he began to wonder
how the “M. E.” happened to be in his office at that late hour. The real
reason was that the editor had entertained friends at the theatre and
lingered long at the supper after. But in Buck’s mind, it could only be
because the books on “How to be a Journalist” all said the real
newspaper man is always at the right place in a news crisis.

Without a question to his guide, the young newspaper man deferentially
followed Mr. Latimer down the long, half-lit hall, through the ground
glass door into the anteroom where, in the day time, a colored Cerebus
sat in state, and thence into the not over-large room of the director of
the great paper. The managing editor, in evening clothes and a crumpled
shirt, was slowly exhaling the smoke of a cigar while he examined a
large wall map of America and Europe—tracing with a long, white finger a
curved red line that marked some steamer course. On the approach of Mr.
Latimer and Stewart, the editor turned, motioned Buck to a chair and
seated himself in the one at his own desk. There was no introduction.
The night city editor took a leaning position against a big table in
silence.

“This is Mr. Stewart, I believe,” the managing editor began with a smile
as he leaned forward and nervously tore a strip of paper into bits. The
smile rather increased Buck’s alarm. He was sure he was in for nothing
but criticism and the smile made him fearful that this was to come in
ironical words.

“Yes, sir.”

“You discovered this new aeroplane—wrote the story about it?”

“Mr. Latimer sent me out on it. I tried to write a story but I guess—”

“At least you know all about it?”

“I think so. Yes, sir. There are some things I couldn’t learn, but I
found out considerable.”

“And it was made by the young men they call the Airship Boys?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Do you think any one else knows what took place to-night?”

“I’m sure no one does.”

“Or the details of the new airship; the nature of it and what it can
do?”

“They seem to be trying to conceal everything. I think no outsiders knew
anything about it.”

“And this machine can travel at the rate of one hundred and eighty miles
an hour?”

“It did it to-night and kept it up for twenty-five minutes.”

Buck’s questioner leaned back in his chair and gave Mr. Latimer a
peculiar look. He seemed about to speak to his assistant but turned
toward young Stewart again, took a long, reflective puff on his cigar
and continued:

“Have you any reason to believe this machine could cross the Atlantic?”

“I think it could. I believe its makers think so. They call it the
‘_Ocean Flyer_.’”

What had been a smile on the editor’s face turned into straight, set
lips. Again he turned to Mr. Latimer.

“These boys are somewhere in the city you say?”

“Newark says so,” was the night city editor’s prompt response as he slid
from the table and took a step toward the desk. “Nathan says they came
in from Newark on the midnight express. I’ve got a man out after them
now.”

“Haven’t heard from him?”

Mr. Latimer stepped to his superior’s desk and took up the telephone.

“See if Winton is back yet,” he asked sharply.

“Mr. Winton called a few minutes ago,” was the instant response from one
of the switchboard operators. “He says them parties is at the Breslin
but he ain’t seen ’em yet. He wants as you shall call the Breslin what
he shall do.”

Mr. Latimer turned to the head editor, the telephone yet in his hand:

“Yes, sir; they are at the Breslin. Our man hasn’t seen them. They’ve
probably turned him down.”

The managing editor thought a moment, in which interval of silence he
relit his cigar and then nodded an approval.

“That’s all,” answered the night city editor to the operator, “no
message now.” And he replaced the receiver. Mr. Latimer’s attitude
seemed to indicate that he knew something important was about to happen.
Buck, himself—only temporarily relieved that the storm had not yet
broken on him—also cudgeled his brain to account for his interrogation.

“You’ve stopped the story?” continued the managing editor at last.

“Yes, sir,” answered Mr. Latimer ruefully, “although most of it is in
type. It was a beat.”