The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Magic of Oz, by L. Frank Baum

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Magic of Oz

Author: L. Frank Baum

Illustrator: John R. Neill

Release Date: October 13, 2015 [EBook #50194]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC OF OZ ***




Produced by David Edwards, Stephen Hutcheson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)






                             [Illustration]




                          The Famous Oz Books


Since 1900, when L. Frank Baum introduced to the children of America THE
WONDERFUL WIZARD OF OZ and all the other exciting characters who inhabit
the land of Oz, these delightful fairy tales have stimulated the
imagination of millions of young readers.

These are stories which are genuine fantasy—creative, funny, tender,
exciting and surprising. Filled with the rarest and most absurd
creatures, each of the 40 volumes which now comprise the series, has
been eagerly sought out by generation after generation until today they
are known to all except the very young or those who were never young at
all.

When, in a recent survey, The New York Times polled a group of teen
agers on the books they liked best when they were young, the Oz books
topped the list.


                         _THE FAMOUS OZ BOOKS_

                            By L. Frank Baum:
  THE WIZARD OF OZ
  THE LAND OF OZ
  OZMA OF OZ
  DOROTHY AND THE WIZARD IN OZ
  THE ROAD TO OZ
  THE EMERALD CITY OF OZ
  THE PATCHWORK GIRL OF OZ
  TIK-TOK OF OZ
  THE SCARECROW OF OZ
  RINKITINK IN OZ
  THE LOST PRINCESS OF OZ
  THE TIN WOODMAN OF OZ
  THE MAGIC OF OZ
  GLINDA OF OZ

                         By Ruth Plumly Thompson:
  THE ROYAL BOOK OF OZ
  KABUMPO IN OZ
  THE COWARDLY LION OF OZ
  GRAMPA IN OZ
  THE LOST KING OF OZ
  THE HUNGRY TIGER OF OZ
  THE GNOME KING OF OZ
  THE GIANT HORSE OF OZ
  JACK PUMPKINHEAD OF OZ
  THE YELLOW KNIGHT OF OZ
  PIRATES IN OZ
  THE PURPLE PRINCE OF OZ
  OJO IN OZ
  SPEEDY IN OZ
  THE WISHING HORSE OF OZ
  CAPTAIN SALT IN OZ
  HANDY MANDY IN OZ
  THE SILVER PRINCESS IN OZ
  OZOPLANING WITH THE WIZARD OF OZ

                            By John R. Neill:
  THE WONDER CITY OF OZ
  SCALAWAGONS OF OZ
  LUCKY BUCKY IN OZ

                              By Jack Snow:
  THE MAGICAL MIMICS IN OZ
  THE SHAGGY MAN OF OZ

                          By Rachel R. Cosgrove:
  THE HIDDEN VALLEY OF OZ

             By Eloise Jarvis McGraw & Lauren McGraw Wagner:
  MERRY GO ROUND IN OZ


            Chicago    THE REILLY & LEE CO.    _Publishers_

                  [Illustration: This Book Belongs To]

                   [Illustration: _The Magic of Oz_]

                [Illustration: Dorothy _and the_ Wizard]




                            THE MAGIC OF OZ


       A Faithful Record of the Remarkable Adventures of Dorothy
            and Trot and the Wizard of Oz, together with the
               Cowardly Lion, the Hungry Tiger and Cap’n
             Bill, in their successful search for a Magical
                   and Beautiful Birthday Present for
                          Princess Ozma of Oz


                                   BY
                             L. FRANK BAUM
                        “Royal Historian of Oz”

                             [Illustration]

                             ILLUSTRATED BY
                             JOHN R. NEILL


                          The Reilly & Lee Co.
                                Chicago

                             [Illustration]

                           Copyright 1919 By
                              L Frank Baum
                          All Rights Reserved
                             MADE IN U.S.A.

                             [Illustration]

I Dedicate this Book to the Children of our Soldiers, the Americans and
their Allies, with unmeasured Pride and Affection.
                                                                L. F. B.

         [Illustration: THE HUNGRY TIGER AND THE COWARDLY LION]

                             [Illustration]


                             TO MY READERS

Curiously enough, in the events which have taken place in the last few
years in our “great outside world,” we may find incidents so marvelous
and inspiring that I cannot hope to equal them with stories of The Land
of Oz.

However, “The Magic of Oz” is really more strange and unusual than
anything I have read or heard about on our side of The Great Sandy
Desert which shuts us off from The Land of Oz, even during the past
exciting years, so I hope it will appeal to your love of novelty.

A long and confining illness has prevented my answering all the good
letters sent me—unless stamps were enclosed—but from now on I hope to be
able to give prompt attention to each and every letter with which my
readers favor me.

Assuring you that my love for you has never faltered and hoping the Oz
Books will continue to give you pleasure as long as I am able to write
them, I am
                         Yours affectionately,
                                                          L. FRANK BAUM,
                                                “Royal Historian of Oz.”

      “OZCOT”
  at HOLLYWOOD
  in CALIFORNIA
        1919

                             [Illustration]




                            LIST OF CHAPTERS


  1 Mount Munch                                                       17
  2 The Hawk                                                          27
  3 Two Bad Ones                                                      34
  4 Conspirators                                                      48
  5 A Happy Corner of Oz                                              53
  6 Ozma’s Birthday Presents                                          65
  7 The Forest of Gugu                                                81
  8 The Li-Mon-Eags Make Trouble                                      87
  9 The Isle of the Magic Flower                                      99
  10 Stuck Fast                                                      112
  11 The Beasts of the Forest of Gugu                                121
  12 Kiki Uses His Magic                                             131
  13 The Loss of the Black Bag                                       144
  14 The Wizard Learns the Magic Word                                157
  15 The Lonesome Duck                                               169
  16 The Glass Cat Finds the Black Bag                               183
  17 A Remarkable Journey                                            197
  18 The Magic of the Wizard                                         209
  19 Dorothy and the Bumble Bees                                     217
  20 The Monkeys Have Trouble                                        226
  21 The College of Athletic Arts                                    235
  22 Ozma’s Birthday Party                                           240
  23 The Fountain of Oblivion                                        255

                              [Illustration]

                     [Illustration: The Magic of Oz]

                        [Illustration: Mt. Munch]




                              Mount Munch


                               

                             [Illustration]

“We are two Li-Mon-Eags,” said Ruggedo, inventing the name. “Our home is
in Sky Island, and we have come to earth to warn the forest beasts that
the people of Oz are about to make war upon them and enslave them, so
that they will become beasts of burden forever after and obey only the
will of their two-legged masters.”

A low roar of anger arose from the Council of Beasts.

“_Who’s_ going to do that?” asked Loo the Unicorn, in a high, squeaky
voice, at the same time rising to his feet.

“The people of Oz,” said Ruggedo.

“But what will _we_ be doing?” inquired the Unicorn.

“That’s what I’ve come to talk to you about.”

“You needn’t talk! We’ll fight the Oz people!” screamed the Unicorn.
“We’ll smash ’em; we’ll trample ’em; we’ll gore ’em; we’ll—”

“Silence!” growled Gugu the King, and Loo obeyed, although still
trembling with wrath. The cold, steady gaze of the Leopard wandered over
the two strange beasts. “The people of Oz,” said he, “have not been our
friends; they have not been our enemies. They have let us alone, and we
have let them alone. There is no reason for war between us. They have no
slaves. They could not use us as slaves if they should conquer us. I
think you are telling us lies, you strange Li-Mon-Eag—you mixed-up beast
who are neither one thing nor another.”

“Oh, on my word, it’s the truth!” protested the Nome in the beast’s
shape. “I wouldn’t lie for the world; I—”

“Silence!” again growled Gugu the King; and, somehow, even Ruggedo was
abashed and obeyed the edict.

“What do you say, Bru?” asked the king, turning to the great Bear, who
had until now said nothing.

“How does the Mixed Beast know that what he says is true?” asked the
Bear.

“Why, I can fly, you know, having the wings of an Eagle,” explained the
Nome. “I and my comrade yonder,” turning to Kiki, “flew to a grove in
Oz, and there we heard the people telling how they will make many ropes
to snare you beasts, and then they will surround this forest, and all
other forests, and make you prisoners. So we came here to warn you, for
being beasts ourselves, although we live in the sky, we are your
friends.”

The Leopard’s lip curled and showed his enormous teeth, sharp as
needles. He turned to the Gray Ape.

“What do _you_ think, Rango?” he asked.

“Send these mixed beasts away, your Majesty,” replied the Gray Ape.
“They are mischief-makers.”

“Don’t do that—don’t do that!” cried the Unicorn, nervously. “The
stranger said he would tell us what to do. Let him tell us, then. Are we
fools, not to heed a warning?”

Gugu the King turned to Ruggedo.

“Speak, Stranger,” he commanded.

“Well,” said the Nome, “it’s this way: The Land of Oz is a fine country.
The people of Oz have many good things—houses with soft beds, all sorts
of nice-tasting food, pretty clothes, lovely jewels, and many other
things that beasts know nothing of. Here in the dark forests the poor
beasts have hard work to get enough to eat and to find a bed to rest in.
But the beasts are better than the people, and why should they not have
all the good things the people have? So I propose that before the Oz
people have the time to make all those ropes to snare you with, that all
we beasts get together and march against the Oz people and capture them.
Then the beasts will become the masters and the people their slaves.”

“What good would that do us?” asked Bru the Bear.

“It would save you from slavery, for one thing, and you could enjoy all
the fine things the Oz people have.”

“Beasts wouldn’t know what to do with the things people use,” said the
Gray Ape.

“But this is only part of my plan,” insisted the Nome. “Listen to the
rest of it. We two Li-Mon-Eags are powerful magicians. When you have
conquered the Oz people we will transform them all into beasts, and send
them to the forests to live, and we will transform all the beasts into
people, so they can enjoy all the wonderful delights of the Emerald
City.”

For a moment no beast spoke. Then the King said: “Prove it.”

“Prove what?” asked Ruggedo.

“Prove that you can transform us. If you are a magician transform the
Unicorn into a man. Then we will believe you. If you fail, we will
destroy you.”

“All right,” said the Nome. “But I’m tired, so I’ll let my comrade make
the transformation.”

Kiki Aru had stood back from the circle, but he had heard all that was
said. He now realized that he must make good Ruggedo’s boast, so he
retreated to the edge of the clearing and whispered the magic word.

Instantly the Unicorn became a fat, chubby little man, dressed in the
purple Gillikin costume, and it was hard to tell which was the more
astonished, the King, the Bear, the Ape or the former Unicorn.

“It’s true!” shouted the man-beast. “Good gracious, look what I am! It’s
wonderful!”

The King of the Beasts now addressed Ruggedo in a more friendly tone.

“We must believe your story, since you have given us proof of your
power,” said he. “But why, if you are so great a magician, cannot you
conquer the Oz people without our help, and so save us the trouble?”

“Alas!” replied the crafty old Nome, “no magician is able to do
everything. The transformations are easy to us because we are
Li-Mon-Eags, but we cannot fight, or conquer even such weak creatures as
the Oz people. But we will stay with you and advise and help you, and we
will transform all the Oz people into beasts, when the time comes, and
all the beasts into people.”

Gugu the King turned to his Counselors.

“How shall we answer this friendly stranger?” he asked.

Loo the former Unicorn was dancing around and cutting capers like a
clown.

“On my word, your Majesty,” he said, “this being a man is more fun than
being a Unicorn.”

“You look like a fool,” said the Gray Ape.

“Well, I _feel_ fine!” declared the man-beast.

                             [Illustration]

“I think I prefer to be a Bear,” said Big Bru. “I was born a Bear, and I
know a Bear’s ways. So I am satisfied to live as a Bear lives.”

“That,” said the old Nome, “is because you know nothing better. When we
have conquered the Oz people, and you become a man, you’ll be glad of
it.”

The immense Leopard rested his chin on the log and seemed thoughtful.

“The beasts of the forest must decide this matter for themselves,” he
said. “Go you, Rango the Gray Ape, and tell your monkey tribe to order
all the forest beasts to assemble in the Great Clearing at sunrise
to-morrow. When all are gathered together, this mixed-up Beast who is a
magician shall talk to them and tell them what he has told us. Then, if
they decide to fight the Oz people, who have declared war on us, I will
lead the beasts to battle.”

Rango the Gray Ape turned at once and glided swiftly through the forest
on his mission. The Bear gave a grunt and walked away. Gugu the King
rose and stretched himself. Then he said to Ruggedo: “Meet us at sunrise
to-morrow,” and with stately stride vanished among the trees.

The man-unicorn, left alone with the strangers, suddenly stopped his
foolish prancing.

“You’d better make me a Unicorn again,” he said. “I like being a man,
but the forest beasts won’t know I’m their friend, Loo, and they might
tear me in pieces before morning.”

So Kiki changed him back to his former shape, and the Unicorn departed
to join his people.

                             [Illustration]

Ruggedo the Nome was much pleased with his success.

“To-morrow,” he said to Kiki Aru, “we’ll win over these beasts and set
them to fight and conquer the Oz people. Then I will have my revenge on
Ozma and Dorothy and all the rest of my enemies.”

“But I am doing all the work,” said Kiki.

“Never mind; you’re going to be King of Oz,” promised Ruggedo.

“Will the big Leopard let me be King?” asked the boy anxiously.

The Nome came close to him and whispered:

“If Gugu the Leopard opposes us, you will transform him into a tree, and
then he will be helpless.”

“Of course,” agreed Kiki, and he said to himself: “I shall also
transform this deceitful Nome into a tree, for he lies and I cannot
trust him.”

                             [Illustration]




                      The Isle of the Magic Flower


                               CHAPTER 9

The Glass Cat was a good guide and led Trot and Cap’n Bill by straight
and easy paths through all the settled part of the Munchkin Country, and
then into the north section where there were few houses, and finally
through a wild country where there were no houses or paths at all. But
the walking was not difficult and at last they came to the edge of a
forest and stopped there to make camp and sleep until morning.

From branches of trees Cap’n Bill made a tiny house that was just big
enough for the little girl to crawl into and lie down. But first they
ate some of the food Trot had carried in the basket.

“Don’t you want some, too?” she asked the Glass Cat.

“No,” answered the creature.

“I suppose you’ll hunt around an’ catch a mouse,” remarked Cap’n Bill.

“Me? Catch a mouse! Why should I do that?” inquired the Glass Cat.

“Why, then you could eat it,” said the sailor-man.

“I beg to inform you,” returned the crystal tabby, “that I do not eat
mice. Being transparent, so anyone can see through me, I’d look nice,
wouldn’t I, with a common mouse inside me? But the fact is that I
haven’t any stomach or other machinery that would permit me to eat
things. The careless magician who made me didn’t think I’d need to eat,
I suppose.”

“Don’t you ever get hungry or thirsty?” asked Trot.

“Never. I don’t complain, you know, at the way I’m made, for I’ve never
yet seen any living thing as beautiful as I am. I have the handsomest
brains in the world. They’re pink, and you can see ’em work.”

                             [Illustration]

“I wonder,” said Trot thoughtfully, as she ate her bread and jam, “if
_my_ brains whirl around in the same way yours do.”

“No; not the same way, surely,” returned the Glass Cat; “for, in that
case, they’d be as good as _my_ brains, except that they’re hidden under
a thick, boney skull.”

“Brains,” remarked Cap’n Bill, “is of all kinds and work different ways.
But I’ve noticed that them as thinks that their brains is best is often
mistook.”

Trot was a little disturbed by sounds from the forest, that night, for
many beasts seemed prowling among the trees, but she was confident Cap’n
Bill would protect her from harm. And in fact, no beast ventured from
the forest to attack them.

At daybreak they were up again, and after a simple breakfast Cap’n Bill
said to the Glass Cat:

“Up anchor, Mate, and let’s forge ahead. I don’t suppose we’re far from
that Magic Flower, are we?”

“Not far,” answered the transparent one, as it led the way into the
forest, “but it may take you some time to get to it.”

Before long they reached the bank of a river. It was not very wide, at
this place, but as they followed the banks in a northerly direction it
gradually broadened.

Suddenly the blue-green leaves of the trees changed to a purple hue, and
Trot noticed this and said:

“I wonder what made the colors change like that?”

“It’s because we have left the Munchkin Country and entered the Gillikin
Country,” explained the Glass Cat. “Also it’s a sign our journey is
nearly ended.”

The river made a sudden turn, and after the travelers had passed around
the bend, they saw that the stream had now become as broad as a small
lake, and in the center of the Lake they beheld a little island, not
more than fifty feet in extent, either way. Something glittered in the
middle of this tiny island, and the Glass Cat paused on the bank and
said:

“There is the gold flower-pot containing the Magic Flower, which is very
curious and beautiful. If you can get to the island, your task is
ended—except to carry the thing home with you.”

Cap’n Bill looked at the broad expanse of water and began to whistle a
low, quavering tune. Trot knew that the whistle meant that Cap’n Bill
was thinking, and the old sailor didn’t look at the island as much as he
looked at the trees upon the bank where they stood. Presently he took
from the big pocket of his coat an axe-blade, wound in an old cloth to
keep the sharp edge from cutting his clothing. Then, with a large pocket
knife, he cut a small limb from a tree and whittled it into a handle for
his axe.

“Sit down, Trot,” he advised the girl, as he worked. “I’ve got quite a
job ahead of me now, for I’ve got to build us a raft.”

“What do we need a raft for, Cap’n?”

“Why, to take us to the island. We can’t walk under water, in the river
bed, as the Glass Cat did, so we must float atop the water.”

“Can you make a raft, Cap’n Bill?”

“O’ course, Trot, if you give me time.”

The little girl sat down on a log and gazed at the Island of the Magic
Flower. Nothing else seemed to grow on the tiny isle. There was no tree,
no shrub, no grass, even, as far as she could make out from that
distance. But the gold pot glittered in the rays of the sun, and Trot
could catch glimpses of glowing colors above it, as the Magic Flower
changed from one sort to another.

“When I was here before,” remarked the Glass Cat, lazily reclining at
the girl’s feet, “I saw two Kalidahs on this very bank, where they had
come to drink.”

“What are Kalidahs?” asked the girl.

“The most powerful and ferocious beasts in all Oz. This forest is their
especial home, and so there are few other beasts to be found except
monkeys. The monkeys are spry enough to keep out of the way of the
fierce Kalidahs, which attack all other animals and often fight among
themselves.”

                             [Illustration]

“Did they try to fight you when you saw ’em?” asked Trot, getting very
much excited.

“Yes. They sprang upon me in an instant; but I lay flat on the ground,
so I wouldn’t get my legs broken by the great weight of the beasts, and
when they tried to bite me I laughed at them and jeered them until they
were frantic with rage, for they nearly broke their teeth on my hard
glass. So, after a time, they discovered they could not hurt me, and
went away. It was great fun.”

“I hope they don’t come here again to drink,—not while we’re here,
anyhow,” returned the girl, “for I’m not made of glass, nor is Cap’n
Bill, and if those bad beasts bit us, we’d get hurt.”

Cap’n Bill was cutting from the trees some long stakes, making them
sharp at one end and leaving a crotch at the other end. These were to
bind the logs of his raft together. He had fashioned several and was
just finishing another when the Glass Cat cried: “Look out! There’s a
Kalidah coming toward us.”

Trot jumped up, greatly frightened, and looked at the terrible animal as
if fascinated by its fierce eyes, for the Kalidah was looking at her,
too, and its look wasn’t at all friendly. But Cap’n Bill called to her:
“Wade into the river, Trot, up to your knees—an’ stay there!” and she
obeyed him at once. The sailor-man hobbled forward, the stake in one
hand and his axe in the other, and got between the girl and the beast,
which sprang upon him with a growl of defiance.

                             [Illustration]

Cap’n Bill moved pretty slowly, sometimes, but now he was quick as could
be. As the Kalidah sprang toward him he stuck out his wooden leg and the
point of it struck the beast between its eyes and sent it rolling upon
the ground. Before it could get upon its feet again the sailor pushed
the sharp stake right through its body and then with the flat side of
the axe he hammered the stake as far into the ground as it would go. By
this means he captured the great beast and made it harmless, for try as
it would, it could not get away from the stake that held it.

Cap’n Bill knew he could not kill the Kalidah, for no living thing in Oz
can be killed, so he stood back and watched the beast wriggle and growl
and paw the earth with its sharp claws, and then, satisfied it could not
escape, he told Trot to come out of the water again and dry her wet
shoes and stockings in the sun.

“Are you sure he can’t get away?” she asked.

“I’d bet a cookie on it,” said Cap’n Bill, so Trot came ashore and took
off her shoes and stockings and laid them on the log to dry, while the
sailor-man resumed his work on the raft.

The Kalidah, realizing after many struggles that it could not escape,
now became quiet, but it said in a harsh, snarling voice:

“I suppose you think you’re clever, to pin me to the ground in this
manner. But when my friends, the other Kalidahs, come here, they’ll tear
you to pieces for treating me this way.”

“P’raps,” remarked Cap’n Bill, coolly, as he chopped at the logs, “an’
p’raps not. When are your folks comin’ here?”

“I don’t know,” admitted the Kalidah. “But when they _do_ come, you
can’t escape them.”

“If they hold off long enough, I’ll have my raft ready,” said Cap’n
Bill.

“What are you going to do with a raft?” inquired the beast.

“We’re goin’ over to that island, to get the Magic Flower.”

The huge beast looked at him in surprise a moment, and then it began to
laugh. The laugh was a good deal like a roar, and it had a cruel and
derisive sound, but it was a laugh nevertheless.

“Good!” said the Kalidah. “Good! Very good! I’m glad you’re going to get
the Magic Flower. But what will you do with it?”

“We’re going to take it to Ozma, as a present on her birthday.”

The Kalidah laughed again; then it became sober. “If you get to the land
on your raft before my people can catch you,” it said, “you will be safe
from us. We can swim like ducks, so the girl couldn’t have escaped me by
getting into the water; but Kalidahs don’t go to that island over
there.”

“Why not?” asked Trot.

The beast was silent.

“Tell us the reason,” urged Cap’n Bill.

“Well, it’s the Isle of the Magic Flower,” answered the Kalidah, “and we
don’t care much for magic. If you hadn’t had a magic leg, instead of a
meat one, you couldn’t have knocked me over so easily and stuck this
wooden pin through me.”

“I’ve been to the Magic Isle,” said the Glass Cat, “and I’ve watched the
Magic Flower bloom, and I’m sure it’s too pretty to be left in that
lonely place where only beasts prowl around it and no one else sees it.
So we’re going to take it away to the Emerald City.”

“I don’t care,” the beast replied in a surly tone. “We Kalidahs would be
just as contented if there wasn’t a flower in our forest. What good are
the things anyhow?”

“Don’t you like pretty things?” asked Trot.

“No.”

“You ought to admire my pink brains, anyhow,” declared the Glass Cat.
“They’re beautiful and you can see ’em work.”

                             [Illustration]

The beast only growled in reply, and Cap’n Bill, having now cut all his
logs to a proper size, began to roll them to the water’s edge and fasten
them together.




                               Stuck Fast


                               CHAPTER 10

The day was nearly gone when, at last, the raft was ready.

“It ain’t so very big,” said the old sailor, “but I don’t weigh much,
an’ you, Trot, don’t weigh half as much as I do, an’ the glass pussy
don’t count.”

“But it’s safe, isn’t it?” inquired the girl.

“Yes; it’s good enough to carry us to the island an’ back again, an’
that’s about all we can expect of it.”

Saying this, Cap’n Bill pushed the raft into the water, and when it was
afloat, stepped upon it and held out his hand to Trot, who quickly
followed him. The Glass Cat boarded the raft last of all.

The sailor had cut a long pole, and had also whittled a flat paddle, and
with these he easily propelled the raft across the river. As they
approached the island, the Wonderful Flower became more plainly visible,
and they quickly decided that the Glass Cat had not praised it too
highly. The colors of the flowers that bloomed in quick succession were
strikingly bright and beautiful, and the shapes of the blossoms were
varied and curious. Indeed, they did not resemble ordinary flowers at
all.

So intently did Trot and Cap’n Bill gaze upon the Golden Flower pot that
held the Magic Flower that they scarcely noticed the island itself until
the raft beached upon its sands. But then the girl exclaimed: “How funny
it is, Cap’n Bill, that nothing else grows here excep’ the Magic
Flower.”

Then the sailor glanced at the island and saw that it was all bare
ground, without a weed, a stone or a blade of grass. Trot, eager to
examine the Flower closer, sprang from the raft and ran up the bank
until she reached the Golden Flowerpot. Then she stood beside it
motionless and filled with wonder. Cap’n Bill joined her, coming more
leisurely, and he, too, stood in silent admiration for a time.

“Ozma will like this,” remarked the Glass Cat, sitting down to watch the
shifting hues of the flowers. “I’m sure she won’t have as fine a
birthday present from anyone else.”

“Do you s’pose it’s very heavy, Cap’n? And can we get it home without
breaking it?” asked Trot anxiously.

“Well, I’ve lifted many bigger things than that,” he replied; “but let’s
see what it weighs.”

He tried to take a step forward, but could not lift his meat foot from
the ground. His wooden leg seemed free enough, but the other would not
budge.

“I seem stuck, Trot,” he said, with a perplexed look at his foot. “It
ain’t mud, an’ it ain’t glue, but somethin’s holdin’ me down.”

The girl attempted to lift her own feet, to go nearer to her friend, but
the ground held them as fast as it held Cap’n Bill’s foot. She tried to
slide them, or to twist them around, but it was no use; she could not
move either foot a hair’s breadth.

“This is funny!” she exclaimed. “What do you ’spose has happened to us,
Cap’n Bill?”

“I’m tryin’ to make out,” he answered. “Take off your shoes, Trot.
P’raps it’s the leather soles that’s stuck to the ground.”

                             [Illustration]

She leaned down and unlaced her shoes, but found she could not pull her
feet out of them. The Glass Cat, which was walking around as naturally
as ever, now said:

“Your foot has got roots to it, Cap’n, and I can see the roots going
into the ground, where they spread out in all directions. It’s the same
way with Trot. That’s why you can’t move. The roots hold you fast.”

Cap’n Bill was rather fat and couldn’t see his own feet very well, but
he squatted down and examined Trot’s feet and decided that the Glass Cat
was right.

“This is hard luck,” he declared, in a voice that showed he was uneasy
at the discovery. “We’re pris’ners, Trot, on this funny island, an’ I’d
like to know how we’re ever goin’ to get loose, so’s we can get home
again.”

“Now I know why the Kalidah laughed at us,” said the girl, “and why he
said none of the beasts ever came to this island. The horrid creature
knew we’d be caught, and wouldn’t warn us.”

In the meantime, the Kalidah, although pinned fast to the earth by Cap’n
Bill’s stake, was facing the island, and now the ugly expression which
passed over its face when it defied and sneered at Cap’n Bill and Trot,
had changed to one of amusement and curiosity. When it saw the
adventurers had actually reached the island and were standing beside the
Magic Flower, it heaved a breath of satisfaction—a long, deep breath
that swelled the deep chest until the beast could feel the stake that
held him move a little, as if withdrawing itself from the ground.

“Ah ha!” murmured the Kalidah, “a little more of this will set me free
and allow me to escape!”

So he began breathing as hard as he could, puffing out his chest as much
as possible with each indrawing breath, and by doing this he managed to
raise the stake with each powerful breath, until at last the
Kalidah—using the muscles of his four legs as well as his deep
breaths—found itself free of the sandy soil. The stake was sticking
right through him, however, so he found a rock deeply set in the bank
and pressed the sharp point of the stake upon the surface of this rock
until he had driven it clear through his body. Then, by getting the
stake tangled among some thorny bushes, and wiggling his body, he
managed to draw it out altogether.

“There!” he exclaimed, “except for those two holes in me, I’m as good as
ever; but I must admit that that old wooden-legged fellow saved both
himself and the girl by making me a prisoner.”

Now the Kalidahs, although the most disagreeable creatures in the Land
of Oz, were nevertheless magical inhabitants of a magical Fairyland, and
in their natures a certain amount of good was mingled with the evil.
This one was not very revengeful, and now that his late foes were in
danger of perishing, his anger against them faded away.

“Our own Kalidah King,” he reflected, “has certain magical powers of his
own. Perhaps he knows how to fill up these two holes in my body.”

So without paying any more attention to Trot and Cap’n Bill than they
were paying to him, he entered the forest and trotted along a secret
path that led to the hidden lair of all the Kalidahs.

While the Kalidah was making good its escape Cap’n Bill took his pipe
from his pocket and filled it with tobacco and lighted it. Then, as he
puffed out the smoke, he tried to think what could be done.

“The Glass Cat seems all right,” he said, “an’ my wooden leg didn’t take
roots and grow, either. So it’s only flesh that gets caught.”

“It’s magic that does it, Cap’n!”

“I know, Trot, and that’s what sticks me. We’re livin’ in a magic
country, but neither of us knows any magic an’ so we can’t help
ourselves.”

“Couldn’t the Wizard of Oz help us—or Glinda the Good?” asked the little
girl.

“Ah, now we’re beginnin’ to reason,” he answered. “I’d probably thought
o’ that, myself, in a minute more. By good luck the Glass Cat is free,
an’ so it can run back to the Emerald City an’ tell the Wizard about our
fix, an’ ask him to come an’ help us get loose.”

“Will you go?” Trot asked the cat, speaking very earnestly.

“I’m no messenger, to be sent here and there,” asserted the curious
animal in a sulky tone of voice.

“Well,” said Cap’n Bill, “you’ve got to go home, anyhow, ’cause you
don’t want to stay here, I take it. And, when you get home, it wouldn’t
worry you much to tell the Wizard what’s happened to us.”

“That’s true,” said the cat, sitting on its haunches and lazily washing
its face with one glass paw. “I don’t mind telling the Wizard—when I get
home.”

“Won’t you go now?” pleaded Trot. “We don’t want to stay here any longer
than we can help, and everybody in Oz will be interested in you, and
call you a hero, and say nice things about you because you helped your
friends out of trouble.”

That was the best way to manage the Glass Cat, which was so vain that it
loved to be praised.

“I’m going home right away,” said the creature, “and I’ll tell the
Wizard to come and help you.”

Saying this, it walked down to the water and disappeared under the
surface. Not being able to manage the raft alone, the Glass Cat walked
on the bottom of the river as it had done when it visited the island
before, and soon they saw it appear on the farther bank and trot into
the forest, where it was quickly lost to sight among the trees.

Then Trot heaved a deep sigh.

“Cap’n,” said she, “we’re in a bad fix. There’s nothing here to eat, and
we can’t even lie down to sleep. Unless the Glass Cat hurries, and the
Wizard hurries, I don’t know what’s going to become of us!”

                             [Illustration]




                    The Beasts of the Forest of Gugu


                               CHAPTER 11

That was a wonderful gathering of wild animals in the Forest of Gugu
next sunrise. Rango, the Gray Ape, had even called his monkey sentinels
away from the forest edge, and every beast, little and big, was in the
great clearing where meetings were held on occasions of great
importance.

In the center of the clearing stood a great shelving rock, having a
flat, inclined surface, and on this sat the stately Leopard Gugu, who
was King of the Forest. On the ground beneath him squatted Bru the Bear,
Loo the Unicorn, and Rango the Gray Ape, the King’s three Counsellors,
and in front of them stood the two strange beasts who had called
themselves Li-Mon-Eags, but were really the transformations of Ruggedo
the Nome, and Kiki Aru the Hyup.

Then came the beasts—rows and rows and rows of them! The smallest beasts
were nearest the King’s rock throne; then there were wolves and foxes,
lynxes and hyenas, and the like; behind them were gathered the monkey
tribes, who were hard to keep in order because they teased the other
animals and were full of mischievous tricks. Back of the monkeys were
the pumas, jaguars, tigers and lions, and their kind; next the bears,
all sizes and colors; after them bisons, wild asses, zebras and
unicorns; farther on the rhinoceri and hippopotami, and at the far edge
of the forest, close to the trees that shut in the clearing, was a row
of thick-skinned elephants, still as statues but with eyes bright and
intelligent.

Many other kinds of beasts, too numerous to mention, were there, and
some were unlike any beasts we see in the menageries and zoos in our
country. Some were from the mountains west of the forest, and some from
the plains at the east, and some from the river; but all present
acknowledged the leadership of Gugu, who for many years had ruled them
wisely and forced all to obey the laws.

When the beasts had taken their places in the clearing and the rising
sun was shooting its first bright rays over the treetops, King Gugu rose
on his throne. The Leopard’s giant form, towering above all the others,
caused a sudden hush to fall on the assemblage.

“Brothers,” he said in his deep voice, “a stranger has come among us, a
beast of curious form who is a great magician and is able to change the
shapes of men or beasts at his will. This stranger has come to us, with
another of his kind, from out of the sky, to warn us of a danger which
threatens us all, and to offer us a way to escape from that danger. He
says he is our friend, and he has proved to me and to my counsellors his
magic powers. Will you listen to what he has to say to you—to the
message he has brought from the sky?”

“Let him speak!” came in a great roar from the great company of
assembled beasts.

                             [Illustration]

                             [Illustration]

So Ruggedo the Nome sprang upon the flat rock beside Gugu the King, and
another roar, gentle this time, showed how astonished the beasts were at
the sight of his curious form. His lion’s face was surrounded by a mane
of pure white hair; his eagle’s wings were attached to the shoulders of
his monkey body and were so long that they nearly touched the ground; he
had powerful arms and legs in addition to the wings, and at the end of
his long, strong tail was a golden ball. Never had any beast beheld such
a curious creature before, and so the very sight of the stranger, who
was said to be a great magician, filled all present with awe and wonder.

Kiki stayed down below and, half hidden by the shelf of rock, was
scarcely noticed. The boy realized that the old Nome was helpless
without his magic power, but he also realized that Ruggedo was the best
talker. So he was willing the Nome should take the lead.

“Beasts of the Forest of Gugu,” began Ruggedo the Nome, “my comrade and
I are your friends. We are magicians, and from our home in the sky we
can look down into the Land of Oz and see everything that is going on.
Also we can hear what the people below us are saying. That is how we
heard Ozma, who rules the Land of Oz, say to her people: ‘The beasts in
the Forest of Gugu are lazy and are of no use to us. Let us go to their
forest and make them all our prisoners. Let us tie them with ropes, and
beat them with sticks, until they work for us and become our willing
slaves.’ And when the people heard Ozma of Oz say this, they were glad
and raised a great shout and said: ‘We will do it! We will make the
beasts of the Forest of Gugu our slaves!’”

The wicked old Nome could say no more, just then, for such a fierce roar
of anger rose from the multitude of beasts that his voice was drowned by
the clamor. Finally the roar died away, like distant thunder, and
Ruggedo the Nome went on with his speech.

“Having heard the Oz people plot against your liberty, we watched to see
what they would do, and saw them all begin making ropes—ropes long and
short—with which to snare our friends the beasts. You are angry, but we
also were angry, for when the Oz people became the enemies of the beasts
they also became our enemies; for we, too, are beasts, although we live
in the sky. And my comrade and I said: ‘We will save our friends and
have revenge on the Oz people,’ and so we came here to tell you of your
danger and of our plan to save you.”

“We can save ourselves,” cried an old elephant. “We can fight.”

“The Oz people are fairies, and you can’t fight against magic unless you
also have magic,” answered the Nome.

“Tell us your plan!” shouted the huge Tiger, and the other beasts echoed
his words, crying: “Tell us your plan.”

“My plan is simple,” replied Ruggedo. “By our magic we will transform
all you animals into men and women—like the Oz people—and we will
transform all the Oz people into beasts. You can then live in the fine
houses of the Land of Oz, and eat the fine food of the Oz people, and
wear their fine clothes, and sing and dance and be happy. And the Oz
people, having become beasts, will have to live here in the forest and
hunt and fight for food, and often go hungry, as you now do, and have no
place to sleep but a bed of leaves or a hole in the ground. Having
become men and women, you beasts will have all the comforts you desire,
and having become beasts, the Oz people will be very miserable. That is
our plan, and if you agree to it, we will all march at once into the
Land of Oz and quickly conquer our enemies.”

When the stranger ceased speaking, a great silence fell on the
assemblage, for the beasts were thinking of what he had said. Finally
one of the walrus asked:

“Can you really transform beasts into men, and men into beasts?”

                             [Illustration]

“He can—he can!” cried Loo the Unicorn, prancing up and down in an
excited manner. “He transformed _me_, only last evening, and he can
transform us all.”

Gugu the King now stepped forward.

“You have heard the stranger speak,” said he, “and now you must answer
him. It is for you to decide. Shall we agree to this plan, or not?”

“Yes!” shouted some of the animals.

“No!” shouted others.

And some were yet silent.

Gugu looked around the great circle.

“Take more time to think,” he suggested. “Your answer is very important.
Up to this time we have had no trouble with the Oz people, but we are
proud and free, and never will become slaves. Think carefully, and when
you are ready to answer, I will hear you.”




                          Kiki Uses His Magic


                               CHAPTER 12

Then arose a great confusion of sounds as all the animals began talking
to their fellows. The monkeys chattered and the bears growled and the
voices of the jaguars and lions rumbled, and the wolves yelped and the
elephants had to trumpet loudly to make their voices heard. Such a
hubbub had never been known in the forest before, and each beast argued
with his neighbor until it seemed the noise would never cease.

Ruggedo the Nome waved his arms and fluttered his wings to try to make
them listen to him again, but the beasts paid no attention. Some wanted
to fight the Oz people, some wanted to be transformed, and some wanted
to do nothing at all.

The growling and confusion had grown greater than ever when in a flash
silence fell on all the beasts present, the arguments were hushed, and
all gazed in astonishment at a strange sight.

For into the circle strode a great Lion—bigger and more powerful than
any other lion there—and on his back rode a little girl who smiled
fearlessly at the multitude of beasts. And behind the lion and the
little girl came another beast—a monstrous Tiger, who bore upon his back
a funny little man carrying a black bag. Right past the rows of
wondering beasts the strange animals walked, advancing until they stood
just before the rock throne of Gugu.

Then the little girl and the funny little man dismounted, and the great
Lion demanded in a loud voice:

“Who is King in this forest?”

“I am!” answered Gugu, looking steadily at the other. “I am Gugu the
Leopard, and I am King of this forest.”

“Then I greet Your Majesty with great respect,” said the Lion. “Perhaps
you have heard of me, Gugu. I am called the ‘Cowardly Lion,’ and I am
King of all Beasts, the world over.”

Gugu’s eyes flashed angrily.

“Yes,” said he, “I have heard of you. You have long claimed to be King
of Beasts, but no beast who is a coward can be King over me.”

“He isn’t a coward, Your Majesty,” asserted the little girl, “he’s just
cowardly, that’s all.”

Gugu looked at her. All the other beasts were looking at her, too.

“Who are you?” asked the King.

“Me? Oh, I’m just Dorothy,” she answered.

“How dare you come here?” demanded the King.

“Why, I’m not afraid to go anywhere, if the Cowardly Lion is with me,”
she said. “I know him pretty well, and so I can trust him. He’s always
afraid, when we get into trouble, and that’s why he’s cowardly; but he’s
a terrible fighter, and that’s why he isn’t a coward. He doesn’t like to
fight, you know, but when he _has_ to, there isn’t any beast living that
can conquer him.”

Gugu the King looked at the big, powerful form of the Cowardly Lion, and
knew she spoke the truth. Also the other Lions of the forest now came
forward and bowed low before the strange Lion.

                             [Illustration]

                             [Illustration]

“We welcome Your Majesty,” said one. “We have known you many years ago,
before you went to live at the Emerald City, and we have seen you fight
the terrible Kalidahs and conquer them, so we know you are the King of
all Beasts.”

“It is true,” replied the Cowardly Lion; “but I did not come here to
rule the beasts of this forest. Gugu is King here, and I believe he is a
good King and just and wise. I come, with my friends, to be the guest of
Gugu, and I hope we are welcome.”

That pleased the great Leopard, who said very quickly:

“Yes; you, at least, are welcome to my forest. But who are these
strangers with you.”

“Dorothy has introduced herself,” replied the Lion, “and you are sure to
like her when you know her better. This man is the Wizard of Oz, a
friend of mine who can do wonderful tricks of magic. And here is my true
and tried friend, the Hungry Tiger, who lives with me in the Emerald
City.”

“Is he _always_ hungry?” asked Loo the Unicorn.

“I am,” replied the Tiger, answering the question himself. “I am always
hungry for fat babies.”

“Can’t you find any fat babies in Oz to eat?” inquired Loo, the Unicorn.

“There are plenty of them, of course,” said the Tiger, “but
unfortunately I have such a tender conscience that it won’t allow me to
eat babies. So I’m always hungry for ’em and never can eat ’em, because
my conscience won’t let me.”

Now of all the surprised beasts in that clearing, not one was so much
surprised at the sudden appearance of these four strangers as Ruggedo
the Nome. He was frightened, too, for he recognized them as his most
powerful enemies; but he also realized that they could not know he was
the former King of the Nomes, because of the beast’s form he wore, which
disguised him so effectually. So he took courage and resolved that the
Wizard and Dorothy should not defeat his plans.

It was hard to tell, just yet, what the vast assemblage of beasts
thought of the new arrivals. Some glared angrily at them, but more of
them seemed to be curious and wondering. All were interested, however,
and they kept very quiet and listened carefully to all that was said.

Kiki Aru, who had remained unnoticed in the shadow of the rock, was at
first more alarmed by the coming of the strangers than even Ruggedo was,
and the boy told himself that unless he acted quickly and without
waiting to ask the advice of the old Nome, their conspiracy was likely
to be discovered and all their plans to conquer and rule Oz be defeated.
Kiki didn’t like the way Ruggedo acted either, for the former King of
the Nomes wanted to do everything his own way, and made the boy, who
alone possessed the power of transformations, obey his orders as if he
were a slave.

Another thing that disturbed Kiki Aru was the fact that a real Wizard
had arrived, who was said to possess many magical powers, and this
Wizard carried his tools in a black bag, and was the friend of the Oz
people, and so would probably try to prevent war between the beasts of
the forest and the people of Oz.

All these things passed through the mind of the Hyup boy while the
Cowardly Lion and Gugu the King were talking together, and that was why
he now began to do several strange things.

He had found a place, near to the point where he stood, where there was
a deep hollow in the rock, so he put his face into this hollow and
whispered softly, so he would not be heard:

“I want the Wizard of Oz to become a fox—Pyrzqxgl!”

The Wizard, who had stood smilingly beside his friends, suddenly felt
his form change to that of a fox, and his black bag fell to the ground.
Kiki reached out an arm and seized the bag, and the Fox cried as loud as
it could:

“Treason! There’s a traitor here with magic powers!”

Everyone was startled at this cry, and Dorothy, seeing her old friend’s
plight, screamed and exclaimed: “Mercy me!”

But the next instant the little girl’s form had changed to that of a
lamb with fleecy white wool, and Dorothy was too bewildered to do
anything but look around her in wonder.

The Cowardly Lion’s eyes now flashed fire; he crouched low and lashed
the ground with his tail and gazed around to discover who the
treacherous magician might be. But Kiki, who had kept his face in the
hollow rock, again whispered the magic word, and the great lion
disappeared and in his place stood a little boy dressed in Munchkin
costume. The little Munchkin boy was as angry as the lion had been, but
he was small and helpless.

Ruggedo the Nome saw what was happening and was afraid Kiki would spoil
all his plans, so he leaned over the rock and shouted: “Stop,
Kiki—stop!”

Kiki would not stop, however. Instead, he transformed the Nome into a
goose, to Ruggedo’s horror and dismay. But the Hungry Tiger had
witnessed all these transformations, and he was watching to see which of
those present was to blame for them. When Ruggedo spoke to Kiki, the
Hungry Tiger knew that he was the magician, so he made a sudden spring
and hurled his great body full upon the form of the Li-Mon-Eag crouching
against the rock. Kiki didn’t see the Tiger coming because his face was
still in the hollow, and the heavy body of the tiger bore him to the
earth just as he said “Pyrzqxgl!” for the fifth time.

So now the tiger which was crushing him changed to a rabbit, and
relieved of its weight, Kiki sprang up and, spreading his eagle’s wings,
flew into the branches of a tree, where no beast could easily reach him.
He was not an instant too quick in doing this, for Gugu the King had
crouched on the rock’s edge and was about to spring on the boy.

From his tree Kiki transformed Gugu into a fat Gillikin woman, and
laughed aloud to see how the woman pranced with rage, and how astonished
all the beasts were at their King’s new shape.

                             [Illustration]

The beasts were frightened, too, fearing they would share the fate of
Gugu, so a stampede began when Rango the Gray Ape sprang into the
forest, and Bru the Bear and Loo the Unicorn followed as quickly as they
could. The elephants backed into the forest, and all the other animals,
big and little, rushed after them, scattering through the jungles until
the clearing was far behind. The monkeys scrambled into the trees and
swung themselves from limb to limb, to avoid being trampled upon by the
bigger beasts, and they were so quick that they distanced all the rest.
A panic of fear seemed to have overtaken the forest people and they got
as far away from the terrible Magician as they possibly could.

                             [Illustration]

But the transformed ones stayed in the clearing, being so astonished and
bewildered by their new shapes that they could only look at one another
in a dazed and helpless fashion, although each one was greatly annoyed
at the trick that had been played on him.

“Who are you?” the Munchkin boy asked the Rabbit; and “Who are you?” the
Fox asked the Lamb; and “Who are you?” the Rabbit asked the fat Gillikin
woman.

“I’m Dorothy,” said the woolly Lamb.

“I’m the Wizard,” said the Fox.

“I’m the Cowardly Lion,” said the Munchkin Boy.

“I’m the Hungry Tiger,” said the Rabbit.

“I’m Gugu the King,” said the fat Woman.

But when they asked the Goose who he was, Ruggedo the Nome would not
tell them.

“I’m just a Goose,” he replied, “and what I was before, I cannot
remember.”




                       The Loss of the Black Bag


                               CHAPTER 13

Kiki Aru, in the form of the Li-Mon-Eag, had scrambled into the high,
thick branches of the tree, so no one could see him, and there he opened
the Wizard’s black bag, which he had carried away in his flight. He was
curious to see what the Wizard’s magic tools looked like, and hoped he
could use some of them and so secure more power; but after he had taken
the articles, one by one, from the bag, he had to admit they were
puzzles to him. For, unless he understood their uses, they were of no
value whatever. Kiki Aru, the Hyup boy, was no wizard or magician at
all, and could do nothing unusual except to use the Magic Word he had
stolen from his father on Mount Munch. So he hung the Wizard’s black bag
on a branch of the tree and then climbed down to the lower limbs that he
might see what the victims of his transformations were doing.

They were all on top of the flat rock, talking together in tones so low
that Kiki could not hear what they said.

“This is certainly a misfortune,” remarked the Wizard in the Fox’s form,
“but our transformations are a sort of enchantment which is very easy to
break—when you know how and have the tools to do it with. The tools are
in my Black Bag; but where is the Bag?”

No one knew that, for none had seen Kiki Aru fly away with it.

“Let’s look and see if we can find it,” suggested Dorothy the Lamb.

So they left the rock, and all of them searched the clearing high and
low without finding the Bag of Magic Tools. The Goose searched as
earnestly as the others, for if he could discover it, he meant to hide
it where the Wizard could never find it, because if the Wizard changed
him back to his proper form, along with the others, he would then be
recognized as Ruggedo the Nome, and they would send him out of the Land
of Oz and so ruin all his hopes of conquest.

Ruggedo was not really sorry, now that he thought about it, that Kiki
had transformed all these Oz folks. The forest beasts, it was true, had
been so frightened that they would now never consent to be transformed
into men, but Kiki could transform them against their will, and once
they were all in human forms, it would not be impossible to induce them
to conquer the Oz people.

So all was not lost, thought the old Nome, and the best thing for him to
do was to rejoin the Hyup boy who had the secret of the transformations.
So, having made sure the Wizard’s black bag was not in the clearing, the
Goose wandered away through the trees when the others were not looking,
and when out of their hearing, he began calling, “Kiki Aru! Kiki Aru!
Quack—quack! Kiki Aru!”

The Boy and the Woman, the Fox, the Lamb and the Rabbit, not being able
to find the bag, went back to the rock, all feeling exceedingly strange.

“Where’s the Goose?” asked the Wizard.

“He must have run away,” replied Dorothy. “I wonder who he was?”

“I think,” said Gugu the King, who was the fat Woman, “that the Goose
was the stranger who proposed that we make war upon the Oz people. If
so, his transformation was merely a trick to deceive us, and he has now
gone to join his comrade, that wicked Li-Mon-Eag who obeyed all his
commands.”

“What shall we do now?” asked Dorothy. “Shall we go back to the Emerald
City, as we are, and then visit Glinda the Good and ask her to break the
enchantments?”

“I think so,” replied the Wizard Fox. “And we can take Gugu the King
with us, and have Glinda restore him to his natural shape. But I hate to
leave my bag of Magic Tools behind me, for without it I shall lose much
of my power as a Wizard. Also, if I go back to the Emerald City in the
shape of a Fox, the Oz people will think I’m a poor Wizard and will lose
their respect for me.”

“Let us make still another search for your tools,” suggested the
Cowardly Lion, “and then, if we fail to find the Black Bag anywhere in
this forest, we must go back home as we are.”

“Why did you come here, anyway?” inquired Gugu.

“We wanted to borrow a dozen monkeys, to use on Ozma’s birthday,”
explained the Wizard. “We were going to make them small, and train them
to do tricks, and put them inside Ozma’s birthday cake.”

“Well,” said the Forest King, “you would have to get the consent of
Rango the Gray Ape, to do that. He commands all the tribes of monkeys.”

“I’m afraid it’s too late, now,” said Dorothy, regretfully. “It was a
splendid plan, but we’ve got troubles of our own, and I don’t like being
a lamb at all.”

“You’re nice and fuzzy,” said the Cowardly Lion.

“That’s nothing,” declared Dorothy. “I’ve never been ’specially proud of
myself, but I’d rather be the way I was born than anything else in the
whole world.”

                             [Illustration]

The Glass Cat, although it had some disagreeable ways and manners,
nevertheless realized that Trot and Cap’n Bill were its friends and so
was quite disturbed at the fix it had gotten them into by leading them
to the Isle of the Magic Flower. The ruby heart of the Glass Cat was
cold and hard, but still it was a heart, and to have a heart of any sort
is to have some consideration for others. But the queer transparent
creature didn’t want Trot and Cap’n Bill to know it was sorry for them,
and therefore it moved very slowly until it had crossed the river and
was out of sight among the trees of the forest. Then it headed straight
toward the Emerald City, and trotted so fast that it was like a crystal
streak crossing the valleys and plains. Being glass, the cat was
tireless, and with no reason to delay its journey, it reached Ozma’s
palace in wonderfully quick time.

“Where’s the Wizard?” it asked the Pink Kitten, which was curled up in
the sunshine on the lowest step of the palace entrance.

“Don’t bother me,” lazily answered the Pink Kitten, whose name was
Eureka.

“I must find the Wizard at once!” said the Glass Cat.

“Then find him,” advised Eureka, and went to sleep again.

The Glass Cat darted up the stairway and came upon Toto, Dorothy’s
little black dog.

“Where’s the Wizard?” asked the Cat.

“Gone on a journey with Dorothy,” replied Toto.

“When did they go, and where have they gone?” demanded the Cat.

“They went yesterday, and I heard them say they would go to the Great
Forest in the Munchkin Country.”

“Dear me,” said the Glass Cat; “that is a long journey.”

“But they rode on the Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion,” explained
Toto, “and the Wizard carried his Black Bag of Magic Tools.”

The Glass Cat knew the Great Forest of Gugu well, for it had traveled
through this forest many times in its journeys through the Land of Oz.
And it reflected that the Forest of Gugu was nearer to the Isle of the
Magic Flower than the Emerald City was, and so, if it could manage to
find the Wizard, it could lead him across the Gillikin country to where
Trot and Cap’n Bill were prisoned. It was a wild country and little
traveled, but the Glass Cat knew every path. So very little time need be
lost, after all.

Without stopping to ask any more questions the Cat darted out of the
palace and away from the Emerald City, taking the most direct route to
the Forest of Gugu. Again the creature flashed through the country like
a streak of light, and it would surprise you to know how quickly it
reached the edge of the Great Forest.

                             [Illustration]

There were no monkey guards among the trees to cry out a warning, and
this was so unusual that it astonished the Glass Cat. Going farther into
the forest it presently came upon a wolf, which at first bounded away in
terror. But then, seeing it was only a Glass Cat, the Wolf stopped, and
the Cat could see it was trembling, as if from a terrible fright.

“What’s the matter?” asked the Cat.

“A dreadful Magician has come among us!” exclaimed the Wolf, “and he’s
changing the forms of all the beasts—quick as a wink—and making them all
his slaves.”

The Glass Cat smiled and said:

“Why, that’s only the Wizard of Oz. He may be having some fun with you
forest people, but the Wizard wouldn’t hurt a beast for anything.”

“I don’t mean the Wizard,” explained the Wolf. “And if the Wizard of Oz
is that funny little man who rode a great Tiger into the clearing, he’s
been transformed himself by the terrible Magician.”

“The Wizard transformed? Why, that’s impossible,” declared the Glass
Cat.

“No; it isn’t. I saw him with my own eyes, changed into the form of a
Fox, and the girl who was with him was changed to a woolly Lamb.”

The Glass Cat was indeed surprised.

“When did that happen?” it asked.

“Just a little while ago in the clearing. All the animals had met there,
but they ran away when the Magician began his transformations, and I’m
thankful I escaped with my natural shape. But I’m still afraid, and I’m
going somewhere to hide.”

With this the Wolf ran on, and the Glass Cat, which knew where the big
clearing was, went toward it. But now it walked more slowly, and its
pink brains rolled and tumbled around at a great rate because it was
thinking over the amazing news the Wolf had told it.

When the Glass Cat reached the clearing, it saw a Fox, a Lamb, a Rabbit,
a Munchkin boy and a fat Gillikin woman, all wandering around in an
aimless sort of way, for they were again searching for the Black Bag of
Magic Tools.

The Cat watched them a moment and then it walked slowly into the open
space. At once the Lamb ran toward it, crying:

“Oh, Wizard, here’s the Glass Cat!”

“Where, Dorothy?” asked the Fox.

“Here!”

The Boy and the Woman and the Rabbit now joined the Fox and the Lamb,
and they all stood before the Glass Cat and speaking together, almost
like a chorus, asked: “Have you seen the Black Bag?”

“Often,” replied the Glass Cat, “but not lately.”

“It’s lost,” said the Fox, “and we must find it.”

“Are you the Wizard?” asked the Cat.

“Yes.”

“And who are these others?”

“I’m Dorothy,” said the Lamb.

“I’m the Cowardly Lion,” said the Munchkin boy.

“I’m the Hungry Tiger,” said the Rabbit.

“I’m Gugu, King of the Forest,” said the fat Woman.

The Glass Cat sat on its hind legs and began to laugh. “My, what a funny
lot!” exclaimed the Creature. “Who played this joke on you?”

“It’s no joke at all,” declared the Wizard. “It was a cruel, wicked
transformation, and the Magician that did it has the head of a lion, the
body of a monkey, the wings of an eagle and a round ball on the end of
his tail.”

The Glass Cat laughed again. “That Magician must look funnier than you
do,” it said. “Where is he now?”

“Somewhere in the forest,” said the Cowardly Lion. “He just jumped into
that tall maple tree over there, for he can climb like a monkey and fly
like an eagle, and then he disappeared in the forest.”

“And there was another Magician, just like him, who was his friend,”
added Dorothy, “but they probably quarreled, for the wickedest one
changed his friend into the form of a Goose.”

“What became of the Goose?” asked the Cat, looking around.

“He must have gone away to find his friend,” answered Gugu the King.
“But a Goose can’t travel very fast, so we could easily find him if we
wanted to.”

                             [Illustration]

“The worst thing of all,” said the Wizard, “is that my Black Bag is
lost. It disappeared when I was transformed. If I could find it I could
easily break these enchantments by means of my magic, and we would
resume our own forms again. Will you help us search for the Black Bag,
Friend Cat?”

“Of course,” replied the Glass Cat. “But I expect the strange Magician
carried it away with him. If he’s a magician, he knows you need that
Bag, and perhaps he’s afraid of your magic. So he’s probably taken the
Bag with him, and you won’t see it again unless you find the Magician.”

“That sounds reasonable,” remarked the Lamb, which was Dorothy. “Those
pink brains of yours seem to be working pretty well to-day.”

“If the Glass Cat is right,” said the Wizard in a solemn voice, “there’s
more trouble ahead of us. That Magician is dangerous, and if we go near
him he may transform us into shapes not as nice as these.”

“I don’t see how we could be any _worse_ off,” growled Gugu, who was
indignant because he was forced to appear in the form of a fat woman.

“Anyway,” said the Cowardly Lion, “our best plan is to find the Magician
and try to get the Black Bag from him. We may manage to steal it, or
perhaps we can argue him into giving it to us.”

“Why not find the Goose, first?” asked Dorothy. “The Goose will be angry
at the Magician, and he may be able to help us.”

“That isn’t a bad idea,” returned the Wizard. “Come on, Friends; let’s
find that Goose. We will separate and search in different directions,
and the first to find the Goose must bring him here, where we will all
meet again in an hour.”




                    The Wizard Learns the Magic Word


                               CHAPTER 14

Now, the Goose was the transformation of old Ruggedo, who was at one
time King of the Nomes, and he was even more angry at Kiki Aru than were
the others whose shapes had been changed. The Nome detested anything in
the way of a bird, because birds lay eggs and eggs are feared by all the
Nomes more than anything else in the world. A goose is a foolish bird,
too, and Ruggedo was dreadfully ashamed of the shape he was forced to
wear. And it would make him shudder to reflect that the Goose might lay
an egg!

So the Nome was afraid of himself and afraid of everything around him.
If an egg touched him he could then be destroyed, and almost any animal
he met in the forest might easily conquer him. And that would be the end
of old Ruggedo the Nome.

Aside from these fears, however, he was filled with anger against Kiki,
whom he had meant to trap by cleverly stealing from him the Magic Word.
The boy must have been crazy to spoil everything the way he did, but
Ruggedo knew that the arrival of the Wizard had scared Kiki, and he was
not sorry the boy had transformed the Wizard and Dorothy and made them
helpless. It was his own transformation that annoyed him and made him
indignant, so he ran about the forest hunting for Kiki, so that he might
get a better shape and coax the boy to follow his plans to conquer the
Land of Oz.

Kiki Aru hadn’t gone very far away, for he had surprised himself as well
as the others by the quick transformations and was puzzled as to what to
do next. Ruggedo the Nome was overbearing and tricky, and Kiki knew he
was not to be depended on; but the Nome could plan and plot, which the
Hyup boy was not wise enough to do, and so, when he looked down through
the branches of a tree and saw a Goose waddling along below and heard it
cry out, “Kiki Aru! Quack—quack! Kiki Aru!” the boy answered in a low
voice, “Here I am,” and swung himself down to the lowest limb of the
tree.

The Goose looked up and saw him.

“You’ve bungled things in a dreadful way!” exclaimed the Goose. “Why did
you do it?”

“Because I wanted to,” answered Kiki. “You acted as if I was your slave,
and I wanted to show these forest people that I am more powerful than
you.”

The Goose hissed softly, but Kiki did not hear that.

Old Ruggedo quickly recovered his wits and muttered to himself: “This
boy is the goose, although it is I who wear the goose’s shape. I will be
gentle with him now, and fierce with him when I have him in my power.”
Then he said aloud to Kiki:

“Well, hereafter I will be content to acknowledge you the master. You
bungled things, as I said, but we can still conquer Oz.”

“How?” asked the boy.

“First give me back the shape of the Li-Mon-Eag, and then we can talk
together more conveniently,” suggested the Nome.

“Wait a moment, then,” said Kiki, and climbed higher up the tree. There
he whispered the Magic Word and the Goose became a Li-Mon-Eag, as he had
been before.

“Good!” said the Nome, well pleased, as Kiki joined him by dropping down
from the tree. “Now let us find a quiet place where we can talk without
being overheard by the beasts.”

So the two started away and crossed the forest until they came to a
place where the trees were not so tall nor so close together, and among
these scattered trees was another clearing, not so large as the first
one, where the meeting of the beasts had been held. Standing on the edge
of this clearing and looking across it, they saw the trees on the
farther side full of monkeys, who were chattering together at a great
rate of the sights they had witnessed at the meeting.

The old Nome whispered to Kiki not to enter the clearing or allow the
monkeys to see them.

“Why not?” asked the boy, drawing back.

“Because those monkeys are to be our army—the army which will conquer
Oz,” said the Nome. “Sit down here with me, Kiki, and keep quiet, and I
will explain to you my plan.”

Now, neither Kiki Aru nor Ruggedo had noticed that a sly Fox had
followed them all the way from the tree where the Goose had been
transformed to the Li-Mon-Eag. Indeed, this Fox, who was none other than
the Wizard of Oz, had witnessed the transformation of the Goose and now
decided he would keep watch of the conspirators and see what they would
do next.

A Fox can move through a forest very softly, without making any noise,
and so the Wizard’s enemies did not suspect his presence. But when they
sat down by the edge of the clearing, to talk, with their backs toward
him, the Wizard did not know whether to risk being seen, by creeping
closer to hear what they said, or whether it would be better for him to
hide himself until they moved on again.

While he considered this question he discovered near him a great tree
which had a hollow trunk, and there was a round hole in this tree, about
three feet above the ground. The Wizard Fox decided it would be safer
for him to hide inside the hollow tree, so he sprang into the hole and
crouched down in the hollow, so that his eyes just came to the edge of
the hole by which he had entered, and from here he watched the forms of
the two Li-Mon-Eags.

“This is my plan,” said the Nome to Kiki, speaking so low that the
Wizard could only hear the rumble of his voice. “Since you can transform
anything into any form you wish, we will transform these monkeys into an
army, and with that army we will conquer the Oz people.”

“The monkeys won’t make much of an army,” objected Kiki.

“We need a great army, but not a numerous one,” responded the Nome. “You
will transform each monkey into a giant man, dressed in a fine uniform
and armed with a sharp sword. There are fifty monkeys over there and
fifty giants would make as big an army as we need.”

“What will they do with the swords?” asked Kiki. “Nothing can kill the
Oz people.”

“True,” said Ruggedo. “The Oz people cannot be killed, but they can be
cut into small pieces, and while every piece will still be alive, we can
scatter the pieces around so that they will be quite helpless.
Therefore, the Oz people will be afraid of the swords of our army, and
we will conquer them with ease.”

“That seems like a good idea,” replied the boy, approvingly. “And in
such a case, we need not bother with the other beasts of the forest.”

“No; you have frightened the beasts, and they would no longer consent to
assist us in conquering Oz. But those monkeys are foolish creatures, and
once they are transformed to Giants, they will do just as we say and
obey our commands. Can you transform them all at once?”

“No, I must take one at a time,” said Kiki. “But the fifty
transformations can be made in an hour or so. Stay here, Ruggedo, and I
will change the first monkey—that one at the left, on the end of the
limb—into a Giant with a sword.”

“Where are you going?” asked the Nome.

“I must not speak the Magic Word in the presence of another person,”
declared Kiki, who was determined not to allow his treacherous companion
to learn his secret, “so I will go where you cannot hear me.”

Ruggedo the Nome was disappointed, but he hoped still to catch the boy
unawares and surprise the Magic Word. So he merely nodded his lion head,
and Kiki got up and went back into the forest a short distance. Here he
spied a hollow tree, and by chance it was the same hollow tree in which
the Wizard of Oz, now in the form of a Fox, had hidden himself.

As Kiki ran up to the tree the Fox ducked its head, so that it was out
of sight in the dark hollow beneath the hole, and then Kiki put his face
into the hole and whispered: “I want that monkey on the branch at the
left to become a Giant man fifty feet tall, dressed in a uniform and
with a sharp sword—Pyrzqxgl!”

Then he ran back to Ruggedo, but the Wizard Fox had heard quite plainly
every word that he had said.

The monkey was instantly transformed into the Giant, and the Giant was
so big that as he stood on the ground his head was higher than the trees
of the forest. The monkeys raised a great chatter but did not seem to
understand that the Giant was one of themselves.

“Good!” cried the Nome. “Hurry, Kiki, and transform the others.”

So Kiki rushed back to the tree and putting his face to the hollow,
whispered:

“I want the next monkey to be just like the first—Pyrzqxgl!”

Again the Wizard Fox heard the Magic Word, and just how it was
pronounced. But he sat still in the hollow and waited to hear it again,
so it would be impressed on his mind and he would not forget it.

Kiki kept running to the edge of the forest and back to the hollow tree
again until he had whispered the Magic Word six times and six monkeys
had been changed to six great giants. Then the Wizard decided he would
make an experiment and use the Magic Word himself. So, while Kiki was
running back to the Nome, the Fox stuck his head out of the hollow and
said softly: “I want that creature who is running to become a
hickory-nut—Pyrzqxgl!”

                             [Illustration]

Instantly the Li-Mon-Eag form of Kiki Aru the Hyup disappeared and a
small hickory-nut rolled upon the ground a moment and then lay still.

The Wizard was delighted, and leaped from the hollow just as Ruggedo
looked around to see what had become of Kiki. The Nome saw the Fox but
no Kiki, so he hastily rose to his feet. The Wizard did not know how
powerful the queer beast might be, so he resolved to take no chances.

“I want this creature to become a walnut—Pyrzqxgl!” he said aloud. But
he did not pronounce the Magic Word in quite the right way, and
Ruggedo’s form did not change. But the Nome knew at once that
“Pyrzqxgl!” was the Magic Word, so he rushed at the Fox and cried:

“I want you to become a Goose—Pyrzqxgl!”

But the Nome did not pronounce the word aright, either, having never
heard it spoken but once before, and then with a wrong accent. So the
Fox was not transformed, but it had to run away to escape being caught
by the angry Nome.

Ruggedo now began pronouncing the Magic Word in every way he could think
of, hoping to hit the right one, and the Fox, hiding in a bush, was
somewhat troubled by the fear that he might succeed. However, the
Wizard, who was used to magic arts, remained calm and soon remembered
exactly how Kiki Aru had pronounced the word. So he repeated the
sentence he had before uttered and Ruggedo the Nome became an ordinary
walnut.

The Wizard now crept out from the bush and said: “I want my own form
again—Pyrzqxgl!”

                             [Illustration]

Instantly he was the Wizard of Oz, and after picking up the hickory-nut
and the walnut, and carefully placing them in his pocket, he ran back to
the big clearing.

Dorothy the Lamb uttered a bleat of delight when she saw her old friend
restored to his natural shape. The others were all there, not having
found the Goose. The fat Gillikin woman, the Munchkin boy, the Rabbit
and the Glass Cat crowded around the Wizard and asked what had happened.

Before he explained anything of his adventure, he transformed them
all—except, of course, the Glass Cat—into their natural shapes, and when
their joy permitted them to quiet somewhat, he told how he had by chance
surprised the Magician’s secret and been able to change the two
Li-Mon-Eags into shapes that could not speak, and therefore would be
unable to help themselves. And the little Wizard showed his astonished
friends the hickory-nut and the walnut to prove that he had spoken the
truth.

“But—see here!”—exclaimed Dorothy, “What has become of those Giant
Soldiers who used to be monkeys?”

“I forgot all about them!” admitted the Wizard; “but I suppose they are
still standing there in the forest.”




                           The Lonesome Duck


                               CHAPTER 15

Trot and Cap’n Bill stood before the Magic Flower, actually rooted to
the spot.

“Aren’t you hungry, Cap’n?” asked the little girl, with a long sigh, for
she had been standing there for hours and hours.

“Well,” replied the sailor-man, “I ain’t sayin’ as I couldn’t _eat_,
Trot—if a dinner was handy—but I guess old folks don’t get as hungry as
young folks do.”

“I’m not sure ’bout that, Cap’n Bill,” she said thoughtfully. “Age
_might_ make a difference, but seems to me _size_ would make a bigger
difference. Seeing you’re twice as big as me, you ought to be twice as
hungry.”

“I hope I am,” he rejoined, “for I can stand it a while longer. I do
hope the Glass Cat will hurry, and I hope the Wizard won’t waste time
a-comin’ to us.”

Trot sighed again and watched the wonderful Magic Flower, because there
was nothing else to do. Just now a lovely group of pink peonies budded
and bloomed, but soon they faded away, and a mass of deep blue lilies
took their place. Then some yellow chrysanthemums blossomed on the
plant, and when they had opened all their petals and reached perfection,
they gave way to a lot of white floral balls spotted with crimson—a
flower Trot had never seen before.

“But I get awful tired watchin’ flowers an’ flowers an’ flowers,” she
said impatiently.

“They’re mighty pretty,” observed Cap’n Bill.

“I know; and if a person could come and look at the Magic Flower just
when she felt like it, it would be a fine thing, but to _have to_ stand
and watch it, whether you want to or not, isn’t so much fun. I wish,
Cap’n Bill, the thing would grow fruit for a while instead of flowers.”

Scarcely had she spoken when the white balls with crimson spots faded
away and a lot of beautiful ripe peaches took their place. With a cry of
mingled surprise and delight Trot reached out and plucked a peach from
the bush and began to eat it, finding it delicious. Cap’n Bill was
somewhat dazed at the girl’s wish being granted so quickly, so before he
could pick a peach they had faded away and bananas took their place.
“Grab one, Cap’n!” exclaimed Trot, and even while eating the peach she
seized a banana with her other hand and tore it from the bush.

The old sailor was still bewildered. He put out a hand indeed, but he
was too late, for now the bananas disappeared and lemons took their
place.

“Pshaw!” cried Trot. “You can’t eat those things; but watch out, Cap’n,
for something else.”

Cocoanuts next appeared, but Cap’n Bill shook his head.

“Ca’n’t crack ’em,” he remarked, “’cause we haven’t anything handy to
smash ’em with.”

“Well, take one, anyhow,” advised Trot; but the cocoanuts were gone now,
and a deep, purple, pear-shaped fruit which was unknown to them took
their place. Again Cap’n Bill hesitated, and Trot said to him:

“You ought to have captured a peach and a banana, as I did. If you’re
not careful, Cap’n, you’ll miss all your chances. Here, I’ll divide my
banana with you.”

Even as she spoke, the Magic Plant was covered with big red apples,
growing on every branch, and Cap’n Bill hesitated no longer. He grabbed
with both hands and picked two apples, while Trot had only time to
secure one before they were gone.

“It’s curious,” remarked the sailor, munching his apple, “how these
fruits keep good when you’ve picked ’em, but dis’pear inter thin air if
they’re left on the bush.”

“The whole thing is curious,” declared the girl, “and it couldn’t exist
in any country but this, where magic is so common. Those are limes.
Don’t pick ’em, for they’d pucker up your mouth and—Ooo! here come
plums!” and she tucked her apple in her apron pocket and captured three
plums—each one almost as big as an egg—before they disappeared. Cap’n
Bill got some too, but both were too hungry to fast any longer, so they
began eating their apples and plums and let the magic bush bear all
sorts of fruits, one after another. The Cap’n stopped once to pick a
fine cantaloupe, which he held under his arm, and Trot, having finished
her plums, got a handful of cherries and an orange; but when almost
every sort of fruit had appeared on the bush, the crop ceased and only
flowers, as before, bloomed upon it.

                             [Illustration]

“I wonder why it changed back,” mused Trot, who was not worried because
she had enough fruit to satisfy her hunger.

“Well, you only wished it would bear fruit ‘for a while,’” said the
sailor, “and it did. P’raps if you’d said ‘forever,’ Trot, it would have
always been fruit.”

“But why should _my_ wish be obeyed?” asked the girl. “I’m not a fairy
or a wizard or any kind of a magic-maker.”

“I guess,” replied Cap’n Bill, “that this little island is a magic
island, and any folks on it can tell the bush what to produce, an’ it’ll
produce it.”

“Do you think I could wish for anything else, Cap’n, and get it?” she
inquired anxiously.

“What are you thinkin’ of, Trot?”

“I’m thinking of wishing that these roots on our feet would disappear,
and let us free.”

“Try it, Trot.”

So she tried it, and the wish had no effect whatever. “Try it yourself,
Cap’n,” she suggested.

Then Cap’n Bill made the wish to be free, with no better result.

“No,” said he, “it’s no use; the wishes only affect the Magic Plant; but
I’m glad we can make it bear fruit, ’cause now we know we won’t starve
before the Wizard gets to us.”

“But I’m gett’n’ tired standing here so long,” complained the girl. “If
I could only lift one foot, and rest it, I’d feel better.”

“Same with me, Trot. I’ve noticed that if you’ve got to do a thing, and
can’t help yourself, it gets to be a hardship mighty quick.”

“Folks that can raise their feet don’t appreciate what a blessing it
is,” said Trot thoughtfully. “I never knew before what fun it is to
raise one foot, an’ then another, any time you feel like it.”

“There’s lots o’ things folks don’t ’preciate,” replied the sailor-man.
“If somethin’ would ’most stop your breath, you’d think breathin’ easy
was the finest thing in life. When a person’s well, he don’t realize how
jolly it is, but when he gets sick he ’members the time he was well, an’
wishes that time would come back. Most folks forget to thank God for
givin’ ’em two good legs, till they lose one o’ ’em, like I did; and
then it’s too late, ’cept to praise God for leavin’ one.”

“Your wooden leg ain’t so bad, Cap’n,” she remarked, looking at it
critically. “Anyhow, it don’t take root on a Magic Island, like our meat
legs do.”

“I ain’t complaining” said Cap’n Bill. “What’s that swimmin’ towards us,
Trot?” he added, looking over the Magic Flower and across the water.

The girl looked, too, and then she replied.

“It’s a bird of some sort. It’s like a duck, only I never saw a duck
have so many colors.”

The bird swam swiftly and gracefully toward the Magic Isle, and as it
drew nearer its gorgeously colored plumage astonished them. The feathers
were of many hues of glistening greens and blues and purples, and it had
a yellow head with a red plume, and pink, white and violet in its tail.
When it reached the Isle, it came ashore and approached them, waddling
slowly and turning its head first to one side and then to the other, so
as to see the girl and the sailor better.

“You’re strangers,” said the bird, coming to a halt near them, “and
you’ve been caught by the Magic Isle and made prisoners.”

“Yes,” returned Trot, with a sigh; “we’re rooted. But I hope we won’t
grow.”

“You’ll grow small,” said the Bird. “You’ll keep growing smaller every
day, until bye and bye there’ll be nothing left of you. That’s the usual
way, on this Magic Isle.”

“How do you know about it, and who are you, anyhow?” asked Cap’n Bill.

                             [Illustration]

“I’m the Lonesome Duck,” replied the bird. “I suppose you’ve heard of
me?”

“No,” said Trot, “I can’t say I have. What makes you lonesome?”

“Why, I haven’t any family or any relations,” returned the Duck.

“Haven’t you any friends?”

“Not a friend. And I’ve nothing to do. I’ve lived a long time, and I’ve
got to live forever, because I belong in the Land of Oz, where no living
thing dies. Think of existing year after year, with no friends, no
family, and nothing to do! Can you wonder I’m lonesome?”

“Why don’t you make a few friends, and find something to do?” inquired
Cap’n Bill.

“I can’t make friends because everyone I meet—bird, beast or person—is
disagreeable to me. In a few minutes I shall be unable to bear your
society longer, and then I’ll go away and leave you,” said the Lonesome
Duck. “And, as for doing anything, there’s no use in it. All I meet are
doing something, so I have decided it’s common and uninteresting and I
prefer to remain lonesome.”

“Don’t you have to hunt for your food?” asked Trot.

“No. In my diamond palace, a little way up the river, food is magically
supplied me; but I seldom eat, because it is so common.”

“You must be a Magician Duck,” remarked Cap’n Bill.

“Why so?”

“Well, ordinary ducks don’t have diamond palaces an’ magic food, like
you do.”

“True; and that’s another reason why I’m lonesome. You must remember I’m
the only Duck in the Land of Oz, and I’m not like any other duck in the
outside world.”

“Seems to me you _like_ bein’ lonesome,” observed Cap’n Bill.

“I can’t say I like it, exactly,” replied the Duck, “but since it seems
to be my fate, I’m rather proud of it.”

“How do you s’pose a single, solitary Duck happened to be in the Land of
Oz?” asked Trot, wonderingly.

“I used to know the reason, many years ago, but I’ve quite forgotten
it,” declared the Duck. “The reason for a thing is never so important as
the thing itself, so there’s no use remembering anything but the fact
that I’m lonesome.”

“I guess you’d be happier if you tried to do something,” asserted Trot.
“If you can’t do anything for yourself, you can do things for others,
and then you’d get lots of friends and stop being lonesome.”

“Now you’re getting disagreeable,” said the Lonesome Duck, “and I shall
have to go and leave you.”

“Can’t you help us any,” pleaded the girl. “If there’s anything magic
about you, you might get us out of this scrape.”

“I haven’t any magic strong enough to get you off the Magic Isle,”
replied the Lonesome Duck. “What magic I possess is very simple, but I
find it enough for my own needs.”

“If we could only sit down a while, we could stand it better,” said
Trot, “but we have nothing to sit on.”

“Then you will have to stand it,” said the Lonesome Duck.

“P’raps you’ve enough magic to give us a couple of stools,” suggested
Cap’n Bill.

“A duck isn’t supposed to know what stools are,” was the reply.

“But you’re different from all other ducks.”

“That is true.” The strange creature seemed to reflect for a moment,
looking at them sharply from its round black eyes. Then it said:
“Sometimes, when the sun is hot, I grow a toadstool to shelter me from
its rays. Perhaps you could sit on toadstools.”

“Well, if they were strong enough, they’d do,” answered Cap’n Bill.

“Then, before I go I’ll give you a couple,” said the Lonesome Duck, and
began waddling about in a small circle. It went around the circle to the
right three times, and then it went around to the left three times. Then
it hopped backward three times and forward three times.

“What are you doing?” asked Trot.

“Don’t interrupt. This is an incantation,” replied the Lonesome Duck,
but now it began making a succession of soft noises that sounded like
quacks and seemed to mean nothing at all. And it kept up these sounds so
long that Trot finally exclaimed:

“Can’t you hurry up and finish that ’cantation? If it takes all summer
to make a couple of toadstools, you’re not much of a magician.”

“I told you not to interrupt,” said the Lonesome Duck, sternly. “If you
get _too_ disagreeable, you’ll drive me away before I finish this
incantation.”

Trot kept quiet, after the rebuke, and the Duck resumed the quacky
muttering. Cap’n Bill chuckled a little to himself and remarked to Trot
in a whisper: “For a bird that ain’t got anything to do, this Lonesome
Duck is makin’ consider’ble fuss. An’ I ain’t sure, after all, as
toadstools would be worth sittin’ on.”

Even as he spoke, the sailor-man felt something touch him from behind
and, turning his head, he found a big toadstool in just the right place
and of just the right size to sit upon. There was one behind Trot, too,
and with a cry of pleasure the little girl sank back upon it and found
it a very comfortable seat—solid, yet almost like a cushion. Even Cap’n
Bill’s weight did not break his toadstool down, and when both were
seated, they found that the Lonesome Duck had waddled away and was now
at the water’s edge.

“Thank you, ever so much!” cried Trot, and the sailor called out: “Much
obliged!”

But the Lonesome Duck paid no attention. Without even looking in their
direction again, the gaudy fowl entered the water and swam gracefully
away.

                             [Illustration]




                   The Glass Cat Finds the Black Bag


                               CHAPTER 16

When the six monkeys were transformed by Kiki Aru into six giant
soldiers fifty feet tall, their heads came above the top of the trees,
which in this part of the forest were not so high as in some other
parts; and, although the trees were somewhat scattered, the bodies of
the giant soldiers were so big that they quite filled the spaces in
which they stood and the branches pressed them on every side.

Of course, Kiki was foolish to have made his soldiers so big, for now
they could not get out of the forest. Indeed, they could not stir a
step, but were imprisoned by the trees. Even had they been in the little
clearing they could not have made their way out of it, but they were a
little beyond the clearing. At first, the other monkeys who had not been
enchanted were afraid of the soldiers, and hastily quitted the place;
but soon finding that the great men stood stock still, although grunting
indignantly at their transformation, the band of monkeys returned to the
spot and looked at them curiously, not guessing that they were really
monkeys and their own friends.

The soldiers couldn’t see them, their heads being above the trees; they
could not even raise their arms or draw their sharp swords, so closely
were they held by the leafy branches. So the monkeys, finding the giants
helpless, began climbing up their bodies, and presently all the band
were perched on the shoulders of the giants and peering into their
faces.

“I’m Ebu, your father,” cried one soldier to a monkey who had perched
upon his left ear, “but some cruel person has enchanted me.”

“I’m your Uncle Peeker,” said another soldier to another monkey.

So, very soon all the monkeys knew the truth and were sorry for their
friends and relations and angry at the person—whoever it was—who had
transformed them. There was a great chattering among the tree-tops, and
the noise attracted other monkeys, so that the clearing and all the
trees around were full of them.

Rango the Gray Ape, who was the Chief of all the monkey tribes of the
forest, heard the uproar and came to see what was wrong with his people.
And Rango, being wiser and more experienced, at once knew that the
strange magician who looked like a mixed-up beast was responsible for
the transformations. He realized that the six giant soldiers were
helpless prisoners, because of their size, and knew he was powerless to
release them. So, although he feared to meet the terrible magician, he
hurried away to the great clearing to tell Gugu the King what had
happened and to try to find the Wizard of Oz and get him to save his six
enchanted subjects.

Rango darted into the Great Clearing just as the Wizard had restored all
the enchanted ones around him to their proper shapes, and the Gray Ape
was glad to hear that the wicked magician-beast had been conquered.

                             [Illustration]

                             [Illustration]

“But now, O mighty Wizard, you must come with me to where six of my
people are transformed into six great giant men,” he said, “for if they
are allowed to remain there, their happiness and their future lives will
be ruined.”

The Wizard did not reply at once, for he was thinking this a good
opportunity to win Rango’s consent to his taking some monkeys to the
Emerald City for Ozma’s birthday cake.

“It is a great thing you ask of me, O Rango the Gray Ape,” said he, “for
the bigger the giants are the more powerful their enchantment, and the
more difficult it will be to restore them to their natural forms.
However, I will think it over.”

Then the Wizard went to another part of the clearing and sat on a log
and appeared to be in deep thought.

The Glass Cat had been greatly interested in the Gray Ape’s story and
was curious to see what the giant soldiers looked like. Hearing that
their heads extended above the tree-tops, the Glass Cat decided that if
it climbed the tall avocado tree that stood at the side of the clearing,
it might be able to see the giants’ heads. So, without mentioning her
errand, the crystal creature went to the tree and, by sticking her sharp
glass claws in the bark, easily climbed the tree to its very top and,
looking over the forest, saw the six giant heads, although they were now
a long way off. It was, indeed, a remarkable sight, for the huge heads
had immense soldier caps on them, with red and yellow plumes and looked
very fierce and terrible, although the monkey hearts of the giants were
at that moment filled with fear.

Having satisfied her curiosity, the Glass Cat began to climb down from
the tree more slowly. Suddenly she discerned the Wizard’s black bag
hanging to a limb of the tree. She grasped the black bag in her glass
teeth, and although it was rather heavy for so small an animal, managed
to get it free and to carry it safely down to the ground. Then she
looked around for the Wizard and seeing him seated upon the stump she
hid the black bag among some leaves and then went over to where the
Wizard sat.

“I forgot to tell you,” said the Glass Cat, “that Trot and Cap’n Bill
are in trouble, and I came here to hunt you up and get you to go and
rescue them.”

“Good gracious, Cat! Why didn’t you tell me before?” exclaimed the
Wizard.

“For the reason that I found so much excitement here that I forgot Trot
and Cap’n Bill.”

“What’s wrong with them?” asked the Wizard.

Then the Glass Cat explained how they had gone to get the Magic Flower
for Ozma’s birthday gift and had been trapped by the magic of the queer
island. The Wizard was really alarmed, but he shook his head and said
sadly:

“I’m afraid I can’t help my dear friends, because I’ve lost my black
bag.”

“If I find it, will you go to them?” asked the creature.

“Of course,” replied the Wizard. “But I do not think that a Glass Cat
with nothing but pink brains can succeed when all the rest of us have
failed.”

“Don’t you admire my pink brains?” demanded the Cat.

“They’re pretty,” admitted the Wizard, “but they’re not regular brains,
you know, and so we don’t expect them to amount to much.”

“But if I find your black bag—and find it inside of five minutes—will
you admit my pink brains are better than your common human brains?”

“Well, I’ll admit they’re better _hunters_,” said the Wizard,
reluctantly, “but you can’t do it. We’ve searched everywhere, and the
black bag isn’t to be found.”

“That shows how much you know!” retorted the Glass Cat, scornfully.
“Watch my brains a minute, and see them whirl around.”

                             [Illustration]

The Wizard watched, for he was anxious to regain his black bag, and the
pink brains really did whirl around in a remarkable manner.

“Now, come with me,” commanded the Glass Cat, and led the Wizard
straight to the spot where it had covered the bag with leaves.
“According to my brains,” said the creature, “your black bag ought to be
here.”

Then it scratched at the leaves and uncovered the bag, which the Wizard
promptly seized with a cry of delight. Now that he had regained his
Magic Tools, he felt confident he could rescue Trot and Cap’n Bill.

Rango the Gray Ape was getting impatient. He now approached the Wizard
and said:

“Well, what do you intend to do about those poor enchanted monkeys?”

“I’ll make a bargain with you, Rango,” replied the little man. “If you
will let me take a dozen of your monkeys to the Emerald City, and keep
them until after Ozma’s birthday, I’ll break the enchantment of the six
Giant Soldiers and return them to their natural forms.”

But the Gray Ape shook his head.

“I can’t do it,” he declared. “The monkeys would be very lonesome and
unhappy in the Emerald City and your people would tease them and throw
stones at them, which would cause them to fight and bite.”

“The people won’t see them till Ozma’s birthday dinner,” promised the
Wizard. “I’ll make them very small—about four inches high, and I’ll keep
them in a pretty cage in my own room, where they will be safe from harm.
I’ll feed them the nicest kind of food, train them to do some clever
tricks, and on Ozma’s birthday I’ll hide the twelve little monkeys
inside a cake. When Ozma cuts the cake the monkeys will jump out on to
the table and do their tricks. The next day I will bring them back to
the forest and make them big as ever, and they’ll have some exciting
stories to tell their friends. What do you say, Rango?”

“I say no!” answered the Gray Ape. “I won’t have my monkeys enchanted
and made to do tricks for the Oz people.”

“Very well,” said the Wizard calmly; “then I’ll go. Come, Dorothy,” he
called to the little girl, “let’s start on our journey.”

“Aren’t you going to save those six monkeys who are giant soldiers?”
asked Rango, anxiously.

“Why should I?” returned the Wizard. “If you will not do me the favor I
ask, you cannot expect me to favor you.”

“Wait a minute,” said the Gray Ape. “I’ve changed my mind. If you will
treat the twelve monkeys nicely and bring them safely back to the
forest. I’ll let you take them.”

“Thank you,” replied the Wizard, cheerfully. “We’ll go at once and save
those giant soldiers.”

So all the party left the clearing and proceeded to the place where the
giants still stood among the trees. Hundreds of monkeys, apes, baboons
and orang-outangs had gathered round, and their wild chatter could be
heard a mile away. But the Gray Ape soon hushed the babel of sounds, and
the Wizard lost no time in breaking the enchantments. First one and then
another giant soldier disappeared and became an ordinary monkey again,
and the six were shortly returned to their friends in their proper
forms.

This action made the Wizard very popular with the great army of monkeys,
and when the Gray Ape announced that the Wizard wanted to borrow twelve
monkeys to take to the Emerald City for a couple of weeks, and asked for
volunteers, nearly a hundred offered to go, so great was their
confidence in the little man who had saved their comrades.

The Wizard selected a dozen that seemed intelligent and good-tempered,
and then he opened his black bag and took out a queerly shaped dish that
was silver on the outside and gold on the inside. Into this dish he
poured a powder and set fire to it. It made a thick smoke that quite
enveloped the twelve monkeys, as well as the form of the Wizard, but
when the smoke cleared away the dish had been changed to a golden cage
with silver bars, and the twelve monkeys had become about three inches
high and were all seated comfortably inside the cage.

                             [Illustration]

The thousands of hairy animals who had witnessed this act of magic were
much astonished and applauded the Wizard by barking aloud and shaking
the limbs of the trees in which they sat. Dorothy said: “That was a fine
trick, Wizard!” and the Gray Ape remarked: “You are certainly the most
wonderful magician in all the Land of Oz!”

“Oh, no,” modestly replied the little man. “Glinda’s magic is better
than mine, but mine seems good enough to use on ordinary occasions. And
now, Rango, we will say good-bye, and I promise to return your monkeys
as happy and safe as they are now.”

The Wizard rode on the back of the Hungry Tiger and carried the cage of
monkeys very carefully, so as not to joggle them. Dorothy rode on the
back of the Cowardly Lion, and the Glass Cat trotted, as before, to show
them the way.

Gugu the King crouched upon a log and watched them go, but as he bade
them farewell, the enormous leopard said:

“I know now that you are the friends of beasts and that the forest
people may trust you. Whenever the Wizard of Oz and Princess Dorothy
enter the Forest of Gugu hereafter, they will be as welcome and as safe
with us as ever they are in the Emerald City.”




                          A Remarkable Journey


                               CHAPTER 17

“You see,” explained the Glass Cat, “that Magic Isle where Trot and
Cap’n Bill are stuck is also in this Gillikin country—over at the east
side of it, and it’s no farther to go across-lots from here than it is
from here to the Emerald City. So we’ll save time by cutting across the
mountains.”

“Are you sure you know the way?” asked Dorothy.

“I know all the Land of Oz better than any other living creature knows
it,” asserted the Glass Cat.

“Go ahead, then, and guide us,” said the Wizard. “We’ve left our poor
friends helpless too long already, and the sooner we rescue them the
happier they’ll be.”

“Are you sure you can get ’em out of their fix?” the little girl
inquired.

“I’ve no doubt of it,” the Wizard assured her. “But I can’t tell what
sort of magic I must use until I get to the place and discover just how
they are enchanted.”

“I’ve heard of that Magic Isle where the Wonderful Flower grows,”
remarked the Cowardly Lion. “Long ago, when I used to live in the
forests, the beasts told stories about the Isle and how the Magic Flower
was placed there to entrap strangers—men or beasts.”

“Is the Flower really wonderful?” questioned Dorothy.

“I have heard it is the most beautiful plant in the world,” answered the
Lion. “I have never seen it myself, but friendly beasts have told me
that they have stood on the shore of the river and looked across at the
plant in the gold flowerpot and seen hundreds of flowers, of all sorts
and sizes, blossom upon it in quick succession. It is said that if one
picks the flowers while they are in bloom they will remain perfect for a
long time, but if they are not picked they soon disappear and are
replaced by other flowers. That, in my opinion, makes the magic plant
the most wonderful in existence.”

“But these are only stories,” said the girl. “Has any of your friends
ever picked a flower from the wonderful plant?”

“No,” admitted the Cowardly Lion, “for if any living thing ventures upon
the Magic Isle, where the golden flowerpot stands, that man or beast
takes root in the soil and cannot get away again.”

“What happens to them, then?” asked Dorothy.

“They grow smaller, hour by hour and day by day, and finally disappear
entirely.”

“Then,” said the girl anxiously, “we must hurry up, or Cap’n Bill an’
Trot will get too small to be comf’table.”

They were proceeding at a rapid pace during this conversation, for the
Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion were obliged to move swiftly in order
to keep pace with the Glass Cat. After leaving the Forest of Gugu they
crossed a mountain range, and then a broad plain, after which they
reached another forest, much smaller than that where Gugu ruled.

“The Magic Isle is in this forest,” said the Glass Cat, “but the river
is at the other side of the forest. There is no path through the trees,
but if we keep going east, we will find the river, and then it will be
easy to find the Magic Isle.”

“Have you ever traveled this way before?” inquired the Wizard.

“Not exactly,” admitted the Cat, “but I know we shall reach the river if
we go east through the forest.”

“Lead on, then,” said the Wizard.

The Glass Cat started away, and at first it was easy to pass between the
trees; but before long the underbrush and vines became thick and
tangled, and after pushing their way through these obstacles for a time,
our travelers came to a place where even the Glass Cat could not push
through.

“We’d better go back and find a path,” suggested the Hungry Tiger.

“I’m s’prised at you,” said Dorothy, eyeing the Glass Cat severely.

“I’m surprised, myself,” replied the Cat. “But it’s a long way around
the forest to where the river enters it, and I thought we could save
time by going straight through.”

“No one can blame you,” said the Wizard, “and I think, instead of
turning back, I can make a path that will allow us to proceed.”

He opened his black bag and after searching among his magic tools drew
out a small axe, made of some metal so highly polished that it glittered
brightly even in the dark forest. The Wizard laid the little axe on the
ground and said in a commanding voice:

  “Chop, Little Axe, chop clean and true;
  A path for our feet you must quickly hew.
  Chop till this tangle of jungle is passed;
  Chop to the east, Little Axe—chop fast!”

Then the little axe began to move and flashed its bright blade right and
left, clearing a way through vine and brush and scattering the tangled
barrier so quickly that the Lion and the Tiger, carrying Dorothy and the
Wizard and the cage of monkeys on their backs, were able to stride
through the forest at a fast walk. The brush seemed to melt away before
them and the little axe chopped so fast that their eyes only saw a
twinkling of the blade. Then, suddenly, the forest was open again, and
the little axe, having obeyed its orders, lay still upon the ground.

The Wizard picked up the magic axe and after carefully wiping it with
his silk handkerchief put it away in his black bag. Then they went on
and in a short time reached the river.

“Let me see,” said the Glass Cat, looking up and down the stream, “I
think we are below the Magic Isle; so we must go up the stream until we
come to it.”

So up the stream they traveled, walking comfortably on the river bank,
and after a while the water broadened and a sharp bend appeared in the
river, hiding all below from their view. They walked briskly along,
however, and had nearly reached the bend when a voice cried warningly:
“Look out!”

The travelers halted abruptly and the Wizard said: “Look out for what?”

“You almost stepped on my Diamond Palace,” replied the voice, and a duck
with gorgeously colored feathers appeared before them. “Beasts and men
are terribly clumsy,” continued the Duck in an irritated tone, “and
you’ve no business on this side of the river, anyway. What are you doing
here?”

“We’ve come to rescue some friends of ours who are stuck fast on the
Magic Isle in this river,” explained Dorothy.

“I know ’em,” said the Duck. “I’ve been to see ’em, and they’re stuck
fast, all right. You may as well go back home, for no power can save
them.”

“This is the Wonderful Wizard of Oz,” said Dorothy, pointing to the
little man.

“Well, I’m the Lonesome Duck,” was the reply, as the fowl strutted up
and down to show its feathers to best advantage. “I’m the great Forest
Magician, as any beast can tell you, but even I have no power to destroy
the dreadful charm of the Magic Isle.”

                             [Illustration]

“Are you lonesome because you’re a magician?” inquired Dorothy.

“No; I’m lonesome because I have no family and no friends. But I like to
be lonesome, so please don’t offer to be friendly with me. Go away, and
try not to step on my Diamond Palace.”

“Where is it?” asked the girl.

“Behind this bush.”

Dorothy hopped off the lion’s back and ran around the bush to see the
Diamond Palace of the Lonesome Duck, although the gaudy fowl protested
in a series of low quacks. The girl found, indeed, a glistening dome
formed of clearest diamonds, neatly cemented together, with a doorway at
the side just big enough to admit the duck.

“Where did you find so many diamonds?” asked Dorothy, wonderingly.

“I know a place in the mountains where they are thick as pebbles,” said
the Lonesome Duck, “and I brought them here in my bill, one by one and
put them in the river and let the water run over them until they were
brightly polished. Then I built this palace, and I’m positive it’s the
only Diamond Palace in all the world.”

“It’s the only one I know of,” said the little girl; “but if you live in
it all alone, I don’t see why it’s any better than a wooden palace, or
one of bricks or cobble-stones.”

“You’re not supposed to understand that,” retorted the Lonesome Duck.
“But I might tell you, as a matter of education, that a home of any sort
should be beautiful to those who live in it, and should not be intended
to please strangers. The Diamond Palace is my home, and I like it. So I
don’t care a quack whether _you_ like it or not.”

                             [Illustration]

“Oh, but I do!” exclaimed Dorothy. “It’s lovely on the outside, but—”
Then she stopped speaking, for the Lonesome Duck had entered his palace
through the little door without even saying good-bye. So Dorothy
returned to her friends and they resumed their journey.

“Do you think, Wizard, the Duck was right in saying no magic can rescue
Trot and Cap’n Bill?” asked the girl in a worried tone of voice.

“No, I don’t think the Lonesome Duck was right in saying that,” answered
the Wizard, gravely, “but it is possible that their enchantment will be
harder to overcome than I expected. I’ll do my best, of course, and no
one can do more than his best.”

That didn’t entirely relieve Dorothy’s anxiety, but she said nothing
more, and soon, on turning the bend in the river, they came in sight of
the Magic Isle.

“There they are!” exclaimed Dorothy eagerly.

“Yes, I see them,” replied the Wizard, nodding. “They are sitting on two
big toadstools.”

“That’s queer,” remarked the Glass Cat. “There were no toadstools there
when I left them.”

“What a lovely flower!” cried Dorothy in rapture, as her gaze fell on
the Magic Plant.

“Never mind the Flower, just now,” advised the Wizard. “The most
important thing is to rescue our friends.”

By this time they had arrived at a place just opposite the Magic Isle,
and now both Trot and Cap’n Bill saw the arrival of their friends and
called to them for help.

“How are you?” shouted the Wizard, putting his hands to his mouth so
they could hear him better across the water.

                             [Illustration]

“We’re in hard luck,” shouted Cap’n Bill, in reply. “We’re anchored here
and can’t move till you find a way to cut the hawser.”

“What does he mean by that?” asked Dorothy.

“We can’t move our feet a bit!” called Trot, speaking as loud as she
could.

“Why not?” inquired Dorothy.

“They’ve got roots on ’em,” explained Trot.

It was hard to talk from so great a distance, so the Wizard said to the
Glass Cat:

“Go to the island and tell our friends to be patient, for we have come
to save them. It may take a little time to release them, for the Magic
of the Isle is new to me and I shall have to experiment. But tell them
I’ll hurry as fast as I can.”

So the Glass Cat walked across the river under the water to tell Trot
and Cap’n Bill not to worry, and the Wizard at once opened his black bag
and began to make his preparations.




                        The Magic of the Wizard


                               CHAPTER 18

He first set up a small silver tripod and placed a gold basin at the top
of it. Into this basin he put two powders—a pink one and a sky-blue
one—and poured over them a yellow liquid from a crystal vial. Then he
mumbled some magic words, and the powders began to sizzle and burn and
send out a cloud of violet smoke that floated across the river and
completely enveloped both Trot and Cap’n Bill, as well as the toadstools
on which they sat, and even the Magic Plant in the gold flowerpot. Then,
after the smoke had disappeared into air, the Wizard called out to the
prisoners:

“Are you free?”

Both Trot and Cap’n Bill tried to move their feet and failed.

“No!” they shouted in answer.

The Wizard rubbed his bald head thoughtfully and then took some other
magic tools from the bag.

First he placed a little black ball in a silver pistol and shot it
toward the Magic Isle. The ball exploded just over the head of Trot and
scattered a thousand sparks over the little girl.

“Oh!” said the Wizard, “I guess that will set her free.”

But Trot’s feet were still rooted in the ground of the Magic Isle, and
the disappointed Wizard had to try something else.

For almost an hour he worked hard, using almost every magic tool in his
black bag, and still Cap’n Bill and Trot were not rescued.

“Dear me!” exclaimed Dorothy, “I’m ’fraid we’ll have to go to Glinda,
after all.”

That made the little Wizard blush, for it shamed him to think that his
magic was not equal to that of the Magic Isle.

“I won’t give up yet, Dorothy,” he said, “for I know a lot of wizardry
that I haven’t yet tried. I don’t know what magician enchanted this
little island, or what his powers were, but I do know that I can break
any enchantment known to the ordinary witches and magicians that used to
inhabit the Land of Oz. It’s like unlocking a door; all you need is to
find the right key.”

“But ’spose you haven’t the right key with you,” suggested Dorothy;
“what then?”

“Then we’ll have to make the key,” he answered.

The Glass Cat now came back to their side of the river, walking under
the water, and said to the Wizard: “They’re getting frightened over
there on the island because they’re both growing smaller every minute.
Just now, when I left them, both Trot and Cap’n Bill were only about
half their natural sizes.”

“I think,” said the Wizard reflectively, “that I’d better go to the
shore of the island, where I can talk to them and work to better
advantage. How did Trot and Cap’n Bill get to the island?”

“On a raft,” answered the Glass Cat. “It’s over there now on the beach.”

“I suppose you’re not strong enough to bring the raft to this side, are
you?”

“No; I couldn’t move it an inch,” said the Cat.

“I’ll try to get it for you,” volunteered the Cowardly Lion. “I’m
dreadfully scared for fear the Magic Isle will capture me, too; but I’ll
try to get the raft and bring it to this side for you.”

“Thank you, my friend,” said the Wizard.

So the Lion plunged into the river and swam with powerful strokes across
to where the raft was beached upon the island. Placing one paw on the
raft, he turned and struck out with his other three legs and so strong
was the great beast that he managed to drag the raft from off the beach
and propel it slowly to where the Wizard stood on the river bank.

“Good!” exclaimed the little man, well pleased.

“May I go across with you?” asked Dorothy.

The Wizard hesitated.

“If you’ll take care not to leave the raft or step foot on the island,
you’ll be quite safe,” he decided. So the Wizard told the Hungry Tiger
and the Cowardly Lion to guard the cage of monkeys until he returned,
and then he and Dorothy got upon the raft. The paddle which Cap’n Bill
had made was still there so the little Wizard paddled the clumsy raft
across the water and ran it upon the beach of the Magic Isle as close to
the place where Cap’n Bill and Trot were rooted as he could.

                             [Illustration]

Dorothy was shocked to see how small the prisoners had become, and Trot
said to her friends: “If you can’t save us soon, there’ll be nothing
left of us.”

“Be patient, my dear,” counselled the Wizard, and took the little axe
from his black bag.

“What are you going to do with that?” asked Cap’n Bill.

“It’s a magic axe,” replied the Wizard, “and when I tell it to chop, it
will chop those roots from your feet and you can run to the raft before
they grow again.”

“Don’t!” shouted the sailor in alarm. “Don’t do it! Those roots are all
flesh roots, and our bodies are feeding ’em while they’re growing into
the ground.”

“To cut off the roots,” said Trot, “would be like cutting off our
fingers and toes.”

The Wizard put the little axe back in the black bag and took out a pair
of silver pincers.

“Grow—grow—grow!” he said to the pincers, and at once they grew and
extended until they reached from the raft to the prisoners.

“What are you going to do now?” demanded Cap’n Bill, fearfully eyeing
the pincers.

“This magic tool will pull you up, roots and all, and land you on this
raft,” declared the Wizard.

“Don’t do it!” pleaded the sailor, with a shudder. “It would hurt us
awfully.”

                             [Illustration]

“It would be just like pulling teeth to pull us up by the roots,”
explained Trot.

“Grow small!” said the Wizard to the pincers, and at once they became
small and he threw them into the black bag.

“I guess, friends, it’s all up with us, this time,” remarked Cap’n Bill,
with a dismal sigh.

“Please tell Ozma, Dorothy,” said Trot, “that we got into trouble trying
to get her a nice birthday present. Then she’ll forgive us. The Magic
Flower is lovely and wonderful, but it’s just a lure to catch folks on
this dreadful island and then destroy them. You’ll have a nice birthday
party, without us, I’m sure; and I hope, Dorothy, that none of you in
the Emerald City will forget me—or dear ol’ Cap’n Bill.”

                             [Illustration]




                      Dorothy and the Bumble Bees


                               CHAPTER 19

Dorothy was greatly distressed and had hard work to keep the tears from
her eyes.

“Is that all you can do, Wizard?” she asked the little man.

“It’s all I can think of just now,” he replied sadly. “But I intend to
keep on thinking as long—as long—well, as long as thinking will do any
good.”

They were all silent for a time, Dorothy and the Wizard sitting
thoughtfully on the raft, and Trot and Cap’n Bill sitting thoughtfully
on the toadstools and growing gradually smaller and smaller in size.

Suddenly Dorothy said: “Wizard, I’ve thought of something!”

“What have you thought of?” he asked, looking at the little girl with
interest.

“Can you remember the Magic Word that transforms people?” she asked.

“Of course,” said he.

“Then you can transform Trot and Cap’n Bill into birds or Bumblebees,
and they can fly away to the other shore. When they’re there, you can
transform ’em into their reg’lar shapes again!”

“Can you do that, Wizard?” asked Cap’n Bill, eagerly.

“I think so.”

“Roots an’ all?” inquired Trot.

“Why, the roots are now a part of you, and if you were transformed to a
bumble-bee the whole of you would be transformed, of course, and you’d
be free of this awful island.”

“All right; do it!” cried the sailor-man.

So the Wizard said slowly and distinctly:

“I want Trot and Cap’n Bill to become bumble-bees—Pyrzqxgl!”

Fortunately, he pronounced the Magic Word in the right way, and
instantly Trot and Cap’n Bill vanished from view, and up from the places
where they had been flew two bumble-bees.

“Hooray!” shouted Dorothy in delight; “they’re saved!”

“I guess they are,” agreed the Wizard, equally delighted.

The bees hovered over the raft an instant and then flew across the river
to where the Lion and the Tiger waited. The Wizard picked up the paddle
and paddled the raft across as fast as he could. When it reached the
river bank, both Dorothy and the Wizard leaped ashore and the little man
asked excitedly:

“Where are the bees?”

“The bees?” inquired the Lion, who was half asleep and did not know what
had happened on the Magic Isle.

“Yes; there were two of them.”

“Two bees?” said the Hungry Tiger, yawning. “Why, I ate one of them and
the Cowardly Lion ate the other.”

“Goodness gracious!” cried Dorothy horrified.

“It was little enough for our lunch,” remarked the Tiger, “but the bees,
were the only things we could find.”

“How dreadful!” wailed Dorothy, wringing her hands in despair. “You’ve
eaten Trot and Cap’n Bill.”

But just then she heard a buzzing overhead and two bees alighted on her
shoulder.

“Here we are,” said a small voice in her ear. “I’m Trot, Dorothy.”

“And I’m Cap’n Bill,” said the other bee.

Dorothy almost fainted, with relief, and the Wizard, who was close by
and had heard the tiny voices, gave a laugh and said:

“You are not the only two bees in the forest, it seems, but I advise you
to keep away from the Lion and the Tiger until you regain your proper
forms.”

“Do it now, Wizard!” advised Dorothy. “They’re so small that you never
can tell what might happen to ’em.”

So the Wizard gave the command and pronounced the Magic Word, and in the
instant Trot and Cap’n Bill stood beside them as natural as before they
had met their fearful adventure. For they were no longer small in size,
because the Wizard had transformed them from bumble-bees into the shapes
and sizes that nature had formerly given them. The ugly roots on their
feet had disappeared with the transformation.

                             [Illustration]

While Dorothy was hugging Trot, and Trot was softly crying because she
was so happy, the Wizard shook hands with Cap’n Bill and congratulated
him on his escape. The old sailor-man was so pleased that he also shook
the Lion’s paw and took off his hat and bowed politely to the cage of
monkeys.

Then Cap’n Bill did a curious thing. He went to a big tree and, taking
out his knife, cut away a big, broad piece of thick bark. Then he sat
down on the ground and after taking a roll of stout cord from his
pocket—which seemed to be full of all sorts of things—he proceeded to
bind the flat piece of bark to the bottom of his good foot, over the
leather sole.

“What’s that for?” inquired the Wizard.

“I hate to be stumped,” replied the sailor-man; “so I’m goin’ back to
that island.”

“And get enchanted again?” exclaimed Trot, with evident disapproval.

“No; this time I’ll dodge the magic of the island. I noticed that my
wooden leg didn’t get stuck, or take root, an’ neither did the glass
feet of the Glass Cat. It’s only a thing that’s made of meat—like man
an’ beasts—that the magic can hold an’ root to the ground. Our shoes are
leather, an’ leather comes from a beast’s hide. Our stockin’s are wool,
an’ wool comes from a sheep’s back. So, when we walked on the Magic
Isle, our feet took root there an’ held us fast. But not my wooden leg.
So now I’ll put a wooden bottom on my other foot an’ the magic can’t
stop me.”

“But why do you wish to go back to the island?” asked Dorothy.

“Didn’t you see the Magic Flower in the gold flower-pot?” returned Cap’n
Bill.

“Of course I saw it, and it’s lovely and wonderful.”

“Well, Trot an’ I set out to get that magic plant for a present to Ozma
on her birthday, and I mean to get it an’ take it back with us to the
Emerald City.”

“That would be fine,” cried Trot eagerly, “if you think you can do it,
and it would be safe to try!”

“I’m pretty sure it is safe, the way I’ve fixed my foot,” said the
sailor, “an’ if I _should_ happen to get caught, I s’pose the Wizard
could save me again.”

“I suppose I could,” agreed the Wizard. “Anyhow, if you wish to try it,
Cap’n Bill, go ahead and we’ll stand by and watch what happens.”

So the sailor-man got upon the raft again and paddled over to the Magic
Isle, landing as close to the golden flower-pot as he could. They
watched him walk across the land, put both arms around the flower-pot
and lift it easily from its place. Then he carried it to the raft and
set it down very gently. The removal did not seem to affect the Magic
Flower in any way, for it was growing daffodils when Cap’n Bill picked
it up and on the way to the raft it grew tulips and gladioli. During the
time the sailor was paddling across the river to where his friends
awaited him, seven different varieties of flowers bloomed in succession
on the plant.

“I guess the Magician who put it on the island never thought that any
one would carry it off,” said Dorothy.

“He figured that only men would want the plant, and any man who went
upon the island to get it would be caught by the enchantment,” added the
Wizard.

“After this,” remarked Trot, “no one will care to go on the island, so
it won’t be a trap any more.”

“There,” exclaimed Cap’n Bill, setting down the Magic Plant in triumph
upon the river bank, “if Ozma gets a better birthday present than that,
I’d like to know what it can be!”

“It’ll s’prise her, all right,” declared Dorothy, standing in awed
wonder before the gorgeous blossoms and watching them change from yellow
roses to violets.

“It’ll s’prise ev’rybody in the Em’rald City,” Trot asserted in glee,
“and it’ll be Ozma’s present from Cap’n Bill and me.”

“I think _I_ ought to have a little credit,” objected the Glass Cat. “I
discovered the thing, and led you to it, and brought the Wizard here to
save you when you got caught.”

“That’s true,” admitted Trot, “and I’ll tell Ozma the whole story, so
she’ll know how good you’ve been.”

                             [Illustration]




                        The Monkeys Have Trouble


                               CHAPTER 20

“Now,” said the Wizard, “we must start for home. But how are we going to
carry that big gold flowerpot? Cap’n Bill can’t lug it all the way,
that’s certain.”

“No,” acknowledged the sailor-man; “it’s pretty heavy. I could carry it
for a little while, but I’d have to stop to rest every few minutes.”

“Couldn’t we put it on your back?” Dorothy asked the Cowardly Lion, with
a good-natured yawn.

“I don’t object to carrying it, if you can fasten it on,” answered the
Lion.

“If it falls off,” said Trot, “it might get smashed an’ be ruined.”

“I’ll fix it,” promised Cap’n Bill. “I’ll make a flat board out of one
of these tree trunks, an’ tie the board on the lion’s back, an’ set the
flowerpot on the board.” He set to work at once to do this, but as he
only had his big knife for a tool his progress was slow.

So the Wizard took from his black bag a tiny saw that shone like silver
and said to it:

  “Saw, little Saw, come show your power;
  Make us a board for the Magic Flower.”

And at once the Little Saw began to move and it sawed the log so fast
that those who watched it work were astonished. It seemed to understand,
too, just what the board was to be used for, for when it was completed
it was flat on top and hollowed beneath in such a manner that it exactly
fitted the Lion’s back.

“That beats whittlin’!” exclaimed Cap’n Bill, admiringly. “You don’t
happen to have _two_ o’ them saws; do you, Wizard?”

“No,” replied the Wizard, wiping the Magic Saw carefully with his silk
handkerchief and putting it back in the black bag. “It’s the only saw of
its kind in the world; and if there were more like it, it wouldn’t be so
wonderful.”

They now tied the board on the Lion’s back, flat side up, and Cap’n Bill
carefully placed the Magic Flower on the board.

“For fear o’ accidents,” he said, “I’ll walk beside the lion and hold
onto the flowerpot.”

Trot and Dorothy could both ride on the back of the Hungry Tiger, and
between them they carried the cage of monkeys. But this arrangement left
the Wizard, as well as the sailor, to make the journey on foot, and so
the procession moved slowly and the Glass Cat grumbled because it would
take so long to get to the Emerald City.

The Cat was sour-tempered and grumpy, at first, but before they had
journeyed far, the crystal creature had discovered a fine amusement. The
long tails of the monkeys were constantly sticking through the bars of
their cage, and when they did, the Glass Cat would slyly seize the tails
in her paws and pull them. That made the monkeys scream, and their
screams pleased the Glass Cat immensely. Trot and Dorothy tried to stop
this naughty amusement, but when they were not looking the Cat would
pull the tails again, and the creature was so sly and quick that the
monkeys could seldom escape. They scolded the Cat angrily and shook the
bars of their cage, but they could not get out and the Cat only laughed
at them.

                             [Illustration]

After the party had left the forest and were on the plains of the
Munchkin Country, it grew dark, and they were obliged to make camp for
the night, choosing a pretty place beside a brook. By means of his magic
the Wizard created three tents, pitched in a row on the grass and nicely
fitted with all that was needful for the comfort of his comrades. The
middle tent was for Dorothy and Trot, and had in it two cosy white beds
and two chairs. Another tent, also with beds and chairs, was for the
Wizard and Cap’n Bill, while the third tent was for the Hungry Tiger,
the Cowardly Lion, the cage of Monkeys and the Glass Cat. Outside the
tents the Wizard made a fire and placed over it a magic kettle from
which he presently drew all sorts of nice things for their supper,
smoking hot.

After they had eaten and talked together for a while under the twinkling
stars, they all went to bed and the people were soon asleep. The Lion
and the Tiger had almost fallen asleep, too, when they were roused by
the screams of the monkeys, for the Glass Cat was pulling their tails
again. Annoyed by the uproar, the Hungry Tiger cried: “Stop that
racket!” and getting sight of the Glass Cat, he raised his big paw and
struck at the creature. The cat was quick enough to dodge the blow, but
the claws of the Hungry Tiger scraped the monkeys’ cage and bent two of
the bars.

                             [Illustration]

Then the Tiger lay down again to sleep, but the monkeys soon discovered
that the bending of the bars would allow them to squeeze through. They
did not leave the cage, however, but after whispering together they let
their tails stick out and all remained quiet. Presently the Glass Cat
stole near the cage again and gave a yank to one of the tails. Instantly
the monkeys leaped through the bars, one after another, and although
they were so small the entire dozen of them surrounded the Glass Cat and
clung to her claws and tail and ears and made her a prisoner. Then they
forced her out of the tent and down to the banks of the stream. The
monkeys had noticed that these banks were covered with thick, slimy mud
of a dark blue color, and when they had taken the Cat to the stream,
they smeared this mud all over the glass body of the cat, filling the
creature’s ears and eyes with it, so that she could neither see nor
hear. She was no longer transparent and so thick was the mud upon her
that no one could see her pink brains or her ruby heart.

In this condition they led the pussy back to the tent and then got
inside their cage again.

By morning the mud had dried hard on the Glass Cat and it was a dull
blue color throughout. Dorothy and Trot were horrified, but the Wizard
shook his head and said it served the Glass Cat right for teasing the
monkeys.

Cap’n Bill, with his strong hands, soon bent the golden wires of the
monkeys’ cage into the proper position and then he asked the Wizard if
he should wash the Glass Cat in the water of the brook.

“Not just yet,” answered the Wizard. “The Cat deserves to be punished,
so I think I’ll leave that blue mud—which is as bad as paint—upon her
body until she gets to the Emerald City. The silly creature is so vain
that she will be greatly shamed when the Oz people see her in this
condition, and perhaps she’ll take the lesson to heart and leave the
monkeys alone hereafter.”

However, the Glass Cat could not see or hear, and to avoid carrying her
on the journey the Wizard picked the mud out of her eyes and ears and
Dorothy dampened her handkerchief and washed both the eyes and ears
clean.

As soon as she could speak the Glass Cat asked indignantly: “Aren’t you
going to punish those monkeys for playing such a trick on me?”

“No,” answered the Wizard. “You played a trick on them by pulling their
tails, so this is only tit-for-tat, and I’m glad the monkeys had their
revenge.”

He wouldn’t allow the Glass Cat to go near the water, to wash herself,
but made her follow them when they resumed their journey toward the
Emerald City.

“This is only part of your punishment,” said the Wizard, severely. “Ozma
will laugh at you, when we get to her palace, and so will the Scarecrow,
and the Tin Woodman, and Tik-Tok, and the Shaggy Man, and Button-Bright,
and the Patchwork Girl, and—”

“And the Pink Kitten,” added Dorothy.

That suggestion hurt the Glass Cat more than anything else. The Pink
Kitten always quarreled with the Glass Cat and insisted that flesh was
superior to glass, while the Glass Cat would jeer at the Pink Kitten,
because it had no pink brains. But the pink brains were all daubed with
blue mud, just now, and if the Pink Kitten should see the Glass Cat in
such a condition, it would be dreadfully humiliating.

For several hours the Glass Cat walked along very meekly, but toward
noon it seized an opportunity when no one was looking and darted away
through the long grass. It remembered that there was a tiny lake of pure
water near by, and to this lake the Cat sped as fast as it could go.

The others never missed her until they stopped for lunch, and then it
was too late to hunt for her.

“I s’pect she’s gone somewhere to clean herself,” said Dorothy.

“Never mind,” replied the Wizard. “Perhaps this glass creature has been
punished enough, and we must not forget she saved both Trot and Cap’n
Bill.”

“After first leading ’em onto an enchanted island,” added Dorothy. “But
I think, as you do, that the Glass Cat is punished enough, and p’raps
she won’t try to pull the monkeys’ tails again.”

The Glass Cat did not rejoin the party of travelers. She was still
resentful, and they moved too slowly to suit her, besides. When they
arrived at the Royal Palace, one of the first things they saw was the
Glass Cat curled up on a bench as bright and clean and transparent as
ever. But she pretended not to notice them, and they passed her by
without remark.




                      The College of Athletic Arts


                               CHAPTER 21

Dorothy and her friends arrived at the Royal Palace at an opportune
time, for Ozma was holding high court in her Throne Room, where
Professor H. M. Wogglebug, T.E., was appealing to her to punish some of
the students of the Royal Athletic College, of which he was the
Principal.

This College is located in the Munchkin Country, but not far from the
Emerald City. To enable the students to devote their entire time to
athletic exercises, such as boating, foot-ball, and the like, Professor
Wogglebug had invented an assortment of Tablets of Learning. One of
these tablets, eaten by a scholar after breakfast, would instantly
enable him to understand arithmetic or algebra or any other branch of
mathematics. Another tablet eaten after lunch gave a student a complete
knowledge of geography. Another tablet made it possible for the eater to
spell the most difficult words, and still another enabled him to write a
beautiful hand. There were tablets for history, mechanics, home cooking
and agriculture, and it mattered not whether a boy or a girl was stupid
or bright, for the tablets taught them everything in the twinkling of an
eye.

This method, which is patented in the Land of Oz by Professor Wogglebug,
saves paper and books, as well as the tedious hours devoted to study in
some of our less favored schools, and it also allows the students to
devote all their time to racing, base-ball, tennis and other manly and
womanly sports, which are greatly interfered with by study in those
Temples of Learning where Tablets of Learning are unknown.

But it so happened that Professor Wogglebug (who had invented so much
that he had acquired the habit) carelessly invented a Square-Meal
Tablet, which was no bigger than your little finger-nail but contained,
in condensed form, the equal of a bowl of soup, a portion of fried fish,
a roast, a salad and a dessert, all of which gave the same nourishment
as a square meal.

The Professor was so proud of these Square-Meal Tablets that he began to
feed them to the students at his college, instead of other food, but the
boys and girls objected because they wanted food that they could enjoy
the taste of. It was no fun at all to swallow a tablet, with a glass of
water, and call it a dinner; so they refused to eat the Square-Meal
Tablets. Professor Wogglebug insisted, and the result was that the
Senior Class seized the learned Professor one day and threw him into the
river—clothes and all. Everyone knows that a wogglebug cannot swim, and
so the inventor of the wonderful Square-Meal Tablets lay helpless on the
bottom of the river for three days before a fisherman caught one of his
legs on a fishhook and dragged him out upon the bank.

The learned Professor was naturally indignant at such treatment, and so
he brought the entire senior class to the Emerald City and appealed to
Ozma of Oz to punish them for their rebellion.

I do not suppose the girl Ruler was very severe with the rebellious boys
and girls, because she had herself refused to eat the Square-Meal
Tablets in place of food, but while she was listening to the interesting
case in her Throne Room, Cap’n Bill managed to carry the golden
flower-pot containing the Magic Flower up to Trot’s room without it
being seen by anyone except Jellia Jamb, Ozma’s chief Maid of Honor, and
Jellia promised not to tell.

Also the Wizard was able to carry the cage of monkeys up to one of the
top towers of the palace, where he had a room of his own, to which no
one came unless invited. So Trot and Dorothy and Cap’n Bill and the
Wizard were all delighted at the successful end of their adventure. The
Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger went to the marble stables behind the
Royal Palace, where they lived while at home, and they too kept the
secret, even refusing to tell the Wooden Sawhorse, and Hank the Mule,
and the Yellow Hen, and the Pink Kitten where they had been.

Trot watered the Magic Flower every day and allowed no one in her room
to see the beautiful blossoms except her friends, Betsy Bobbin and
Dorothy. The wonderful plant did not seem to lose any of its magic by
being removed from its island, and Trot was sure that Ozma would prize
it as one of her most delightful treasures.

Up in his tower the little Wizard of Oz began training his twelve tiny
monkeys, and the little creatures were so intelligent that they learned
every trick the Wizard tried to teach them. The Wizard treated them with
great kindness and gentleness and gave them the food that monkeys love
best, so they promised to do their best on the great occasion of Ozma’s
birthday.

                             [Illustration]




                         Ozma’s Birthday Party


                               CHAPTER 22

It seems odd that a fairy should have a birthday, for fairies, they say,
were born at the beginning of time and live forever. Yet, on the other
hand, it would be a shame to deprive a fairy, who has so many other good
things, of the delights of a birthday. So we need not wonder that the
fairies keep their birthdays just as other folks do, and consider them
occasions for feasting and rejoicing.

Ozma, the beautiful girl Ruler of the Fairyland of Oz, was a real fairy,
and so sweet and gentle in caring for her people that she was greatly
beloved by them all. She lived in the most magnificent palace in the
most magnificent city in the world, but that did not prevent her from
being the friend of the most humble person in her dominions. She would
mount her wooden Sawhorse, and ride out to a farm house and sit in the
kitchen to talk with the good wife of the farmer while she did her
family baking; or she would play with the children and give them rides
on her famous wooden steed; or she would stop in a forest to speak to a
charcoal burner and ask if he was happy or desired anything to make him
more content; or she would teach young girls how to sew and plan pretty
dresses, or enter the shops where the jewelers and craftsmen were busy
and watch them at their work, giving to each and all a cheering word or
sunny smile.

And then Ozma would sit in her jeweled throne, with her chosen courtiers
all about her, and listen patiently to any complaint brought to her by
her subjects, striving to accord equal justice to all. Knowing she was
fair in her decisions, the Oz people never murmured at her judgments,
but agreed, if Ozma decided against them, she was right and they wrong.

When Dorothy and Trot and Betsy Bobbin and Ozma were together, one would
think they were all about of an age, and the fairy Ruler no older and no
more “grown up” than the other three. She would laugh and romp with them
in regular girlish fashion, yet there was an air of quiet dignity about
Ozma, even in her merriest moods, that, in a manner, distinguished her
from the others. The three girls loved her devotedly, but they were
never able to quite forget that Ozma was the Royal Ruler of the
wonderful fairyland of Oz, and by birth belonged to a powerful race.

Ozma’s palace stood in the center of a delightful and extensive garden,
where splendid trees and flowering shrubs and statuary and fountains
abounded. One could walk for hours in this fascinating park and see
something interesting at every step. In one place was an aquarium, where
strange and beautiful fish swam; at another spot all the birds of the
air gathered daily to a great feast which Ozma’s servants provided for
them, and were so fearless of harm that they would alight upon one’s
shoulders and eat from one’s hand. There was also the Fountain of the
Water of Oblivion, but it was dangerous to drink of this water, because
it made one forget everything he had ever before known, even to his own
name, and therefore Ozma had placed a sign of warning upon the fountain.
But there were also fountains that were delightfully perfumed, and
fountains of delicious nectar, cool and richly flavored, where all were
welcome to refresh themselves.

                             [Illustration]

Around the palace grounds was a great wall, thickly encrusted with
glittering emeralds, but the gates stood open and no one was forbidden
entrance. On holidays the people of the Emerald City often took their
children to see the wonders of Ozma’s gardens, and even entered the
Royal Palace, if they felt so inclined, for they knew that they and
their Ruler were friends, and that Ozma delighted to give them pleasure.

When all this is considered, you will not be surprised that the people
throughout the Land of Oz, as well as Ozma’s most intimate friends and
her royal courtiers, were eager to celebrate her birthday, and made
preparations for the festival weeks in advance. All the brass bands
practiced their nicest tunes, for they were to march in the numerous
processions to be made in the Winkie Country, the Gillikin Country, the
Munchkin Country and the Quadling Country, as well as in the Emerald
City. Not all the people could go to congratulate their Ruler, but all
could celebrate her birthday, in one way or another, however far distant
from her palace they might be. Every home and building throughout the
Land of Oz was to be decorated with banners and bunting, and there were
to be games, and plays, and a general good time for every one.

It was Ozma’s custom on her birthday to give a grand feast at the
palace, to which all her closest friends were invited. It was a queerly
assorted company, indeed, for there are more quaint and unusual
characters in Oz than in all the rest of the world, and Ozma was more
interested in unusual people than in ordinary ones—just as you and I
are.

On this especial birthday of the lovely girl Ruler, a long table was set
in the royal Banquet Hall of the palace, at which were place-cards for
the invited guests, and at one end of the great room was a smaller
table, not so high, for Ozma’s animal friends, whom she never forgot,
and at the other end was a big table where all of the birthday gifts
were to be arranged.

When the guests arrived, they placed their gifts on this table and then
found their places at the banquet table. And, after the guests were all
placed, the animals entered in a solemn procession and were placed at
their table by Jellia Jamb. Then, while an orchestra hidden by a bank of
roses and ferns played a march composed for the occasion, the Royal Ozma
entered the Banquet Hall, attended by her Maids of Honor, and took her
seat at the head of the table.

                             [Illustration]

                             [Illustration]

She was greeted by a cheer from all the assembled company, the animals
adding their roars and growls and barks and mewing and cackling to swell
the glad tumult, and then all seated themselves at their tables.

At Ozma’s right sat the famous Scarecrow of Oz, whose straw-stuffed body
was not beautiful, but whose happy nature and shrewd wit had made him a
general favorite. On the left of the Ruler was placed the Tin Woodman,
whose metal body had been brightly polished for this event. The Tin
Woodman was the Emperor of the Winkie Country and one of the most
important persons in Oz.

Next to the Scarecrow, Dorothy was seated, and next to her was Tik-Tok,
the Clockwork Man, who had been wound up as tightly as his clockwork
would permit, so he wouldn’t interrupt the festivities by running down.
Then came Aunt Em and Uncle Henry, Dorothy’s own relations, two kindly
old people who had a cozy home in the Emerald City and were very happy
and contented there. Then Betsy Bobbin was seated, and next to her the
droll and delightful Shaggy Man, who was a favorite wherever he went.

On the other side of the table, opposite the Tin Woodman was placed
Trot, and next to her, Cap’n Bill. Then was seated Button Bright and Ojo
the Lucky, and Dr. Pipt and his good wife Margalot, and the astonishing
Frogman, who had come from the Yip country to be present at Ozma’s
birthday feast.

At the foot of the table, facing Ozma, was seated the queenly Glinda,
the good Sorceress of Oz, for this was really the place of honor next to
the head of the table where Ozma herself sat. On Glinda’s right was the
Little Wizard of Oz, who owed to Glinda all of the magical arts he knew.
Then came Jinjur, a pretty girl farmer of whom Ozma and Dorothy were
quite fond. The adjoining seat was occupied by the Tin Soldier, and next
to him was Professor H. M. Wogglebug, T.E., of the Royal Athletic
College.

On Glinda’s left was placed the jolly Patchwork Girl, who was a little
afraid of the Sorceress and so was likely to behave herself pretty well.
The Shaggy Man’s brother was beside the Patchwork Girl, and then came
that interesting personage, Jack Pumpkinhead, who had grown a splendid
big pumpkin for a new head to be worn on Ozma’s birthday, and had carved
a face on it that was even jollier in expression than the one he had
last worn. New heads were not unusual with Jack, for the pumpkins did
not keep long, and when the seeds—which served him as brains—began to
get soft and mushy, he realized his head would soon spoil, and so he
procured a new one from his great field of pumpkins—grown by him so that
he need never lack a head.

You will have noticed that the company at Ozma’s banquet table was
somewhat mixed, but every one invited was a tried and trusted friend of
the girl Ruler, and their presence made her quite happy.

No sooner had Ozma seated herself, with her back to the birthday table,
than she noticed that all present were eyeing with curiosity and
pleasure something behind her, for the gorgeous Magic Flower was
blooming gloriously and the mammoth blossoms that quickly succeeded one
another on the plant were beautiful to view and filled the entire room
with their delicate fragrance. Ozma wanted to look, too, to see what all
were staring at, but she controlled her curiosity because it was not
proper that she should yet view her birthday gifts.

So the sweet and lovely Ruler devoted herself to her guests, several of
whom, as the Sorcerer, the Tin Woodman, the Patchwork Girl, Tik-Tok,
Jack Pumpkinhead and the Tin Soldier, never ate anything but sat very
politely in their places and tried to entertain those of the guests who
did eat.

And, at the animal table, there was another interesting group,
consisting of the Cowardly Lion, the Hungry Tiger, Toto—Dorothy’s little
shaggy black dog—Hank the Mule, the Pink Kitten, the Wooden Sawhorse,
the Yellow Hen, and the Glass Cat. All of these had good appetites
except the Sawhorse and the Glass Cat, and each was given a plentiful
supply of the food it liked best.

Finally, when the banquet was nearly over and the ice-cream was to be
served, four servants entered bearing a huge cake, all frosted and
decorated with candy flowers. Around the edge of the cake was a row of
lighted candles, and in the center were raised candy letters that
spelled the words:

                                 OZMA’S
                             Birthday Cake
                                  from
                         Dorothy and the Wizard

“Oh, how beautiful!” cried Ozma, greatly delighted, and Dorothy said
eagerly: “Now you must cut the cake, Ozma, and each of us will eat a
piece with our ice-cream.”

Jellia Jamb brought a large golden knife with a jeweled handle, and Ozma
stood up in her place and attempted to cut the cake. But as soon as the
frosting in the center broke under the pressure of the knife there
leaped from the cake a tiny monkey three inches high, and he was
followed by another and another, until twelve monkeys stood on the
tablecloth and bowed low to Ozma.

“Congratulations to our gracious Ruler!” they exclaimed in a chorus, and
then they began a dance, so droll and amusing that all the company
roared with laughter and even Ozma joined in the merriment. But after
the dance the monkeys performed some wonderful acrobatic feats, and then
they ran to the hollow of the cake and took out some band instruments of
burnished gold—cornets, horns, drums, and the like—and forming into a
procession the monkeys marched up and down the table playing a jolly
tune with the ease of skilled musicians.

Dorothy was delighted with the success of her “Surprise Cake,” and after
the monkeys had finished their performance, the banquet came to an end.

                             [Illustration]

Now was the time for Ozma to see her other presents, so Glinda the Good
rose and, taking the girl Ruler by her hand, led her to the table where
all her gifts were placed in magnificent array. The Magic Flower of
course attracted her attention first, and Trot had to tell her the whole
story of their adventures in getting it. The little girl did not forget
to give due credit to the Glass Cat and the little Wizard, but it was
really Cap’n Bill who bravely carried the golden flowerpot away from the
enchanted Isle.

Ozma thanked them all, and said she would place the Magic Flower in her
boudoir where she might enjoy its beauty and fragrance continually. But
now she discovered the marvelous gown woven by Glinda and her maidens
from strands drawn from pure emeralds, and being a girl who loved pretty
clothes, Ozma’s ecstasy at being presented with this exquisite gown may
well be imagined. She could hardly wait to put it on, but the table was
loaded with other pretty gifts and the night was far spent before the
happy girl Ruler had examined all her presents and thanked those who had
lovingly donated them.




                        The Fountain of Oblivion


                               CHAPTER 23

The morning after the birthday fete, as the Wizard and Dorothy were
walking in the grounds of the palace, Ozma came out and joined them,
saying:

“I want to hear more of your adventures in the Forest of Gugu, and how
you were able to get those dear little monkeys to use in Dorothy’s
Surprise Cake.”

So they sat down on a marble bench near to the fountain of the Water of
Oblivion, and between them Dorothy and the Wizard related their
adventures.

“I was dreadfully fussy while I was a woolly lamb,” said Dorothy, “for
it didn’t feel good, a bit. And I wasn’t quite sure, you know, that I’d
ever get to be a girl again.”

“You might have been a woolly lamb yet, if I hadn’t happened to have
discovered that Magic Transformation Word,” declared the Wizard.

“But what became of the walnut and the hickory-nut into which you
transformed those dreadful beast magicians?” inquired Ozma.

“Why, I’d almost forgotten them,” was the reply; “but I believe they are
still here in my pocket.”

Then he searched in his pockets and brought out the two nuts and showed
them to her.

Ozma regarded them thoughtfully.

“It isn’t right to leave any living creatures in such helpless forms,”
said she. “I think, Wizard, you ought to transform them into their
natural shapes again.”

“But I don’t know what their natural shapes are,” he objected, “for of
course the forms of mixed animals which they had assumed were not
natural to them. And you must not forget, Ozma, that their natures were
cruel and mischievous, so if I bring them back to life they might cause
us a great deal of trouble.”

“Nevertheless,” said the Ruler of Oz, “we must free them from their
present enchantments. When you restore them to their natural forms we
will discover who they really are, and surely we need not fear any two
people, even though they prove to be magicians and our enemies.”

“I am not so sure of that,” protested the Wizard, with a shake of his
bald head. “The one bit of magic I robbed them of—which was the word of
transformation—is so simple, yet so powerful, that neither Glinda nor I
can equal it. It isn’t all in the word, you know, it’s the way the word
is pronounced. So if the two strange magicians have other magic of the
same sort, they might prove very dangerous to us, if we liberated them.”

“I’ve an idea!” exclaimed Dorothy. “I’m no wizard, and no fairy, but if
you do as I say, we needn’t fear these people at all.”

“What is your thought, my dear?” asked Ozma.

“Well,” replied the girl, “here is this fountain of the Water of
Oblivion, and that’s what put the notion into my head. When the Wizard
speaks that ter’ble word that will change ’em back to their real forms,
he can make ’em dreadful thirsty, too, and we’ll put a cup right here by
the fountain, so it’ll be handy. Then they’ll drink the water and forget
all the magic they ever knew—and everything else, too.”

“That’s not a bad idea,” said the Wizard, looking at Dorothy
approvingly.

“It’s a very _good_ idea,” declared Ozma. “Run for a cup, Dorothy.”

So Dorothy ran to get a cup, and while she was gone the Wizard said:

“I don’t know whether the real forms of these magicians are those of men
or beasts. If they’re beasts, they would not drink from a cup but might
attack us at once and drink afterward. So it might be safer for us to
have the Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger here to protect us if
necessary.”

Ozma drew out a silver whistle which was attached to a slender gold
chain and blew upon the whistle two shrill blasts. The sound, though not
harsh, was very penetrating, and as soon as it reached the ears of the
Cowardly Lion and the Hungry Tiger, the two huge beasts quickly came
bounding toward them. Ozma explained to them what the Wizard was about
to do, and told them to keep quiet unless danger threatened. So the two
powerful guardians of the Ruler of Oz crouched beside the fountain and
waited.

                             [Illustration]

Dorothy returned and set the cup on the edge of the fountain. Then the
Wizard placed the hickory-nut beside the fountain and said in a solemn
voice:

“I want you to resume your natural form, and to be very
thirsty—Pyrzqxgl!”

In an instant there appeared, in the place of the hickory-nut, the form
of Kiki Aru, the Hyup boy. He seemed bewildered, at first, as if trying
to remember what had happened to him and why he was in this strange
place. But he was facing the fountain, and the bubbling water reminded
him that he was thirsty. Without noticing Ozma, the Wizard and Dorothy,
who were behind him, he picked up the cup, filled it with the Water of
Oblivion, and drank it to the last drop.

He was now no longer thirsty, but he felt more bewildered than ever, for
now he could remember nothing at all—not even his name or where he came
from. He looked around the beautiful garden with a pleased expression,
and then, turning, he beheld Ozma and the Wizard and Dorothy regarding
him curiously and the two great beasts crouching behind them.

Kiki Aru did not know who they were, but he thought Ozma very lovely and
Dorothy very pleasant. So he smiled at them—the same innocent, happy
smile that a baby might have indulged in, and that pleased Dorothy, who
seized his hand and led him to a seat beside her on the bench.

“Why, I thought you were a dreadful magician,” she exclaimed, “and
you’re only a boy!”

“What is a magician?” he asked, “and what is a boy?”

“Don’t you know?” inquired the girl.

Kiki shook his head. Then he laughed.

“I do not seem to know anything,” he replied.

                             [Illustration]

“It’s very curious,” remarked the Wizard. “He wears the dress of the
Munchkins, so he must have lived at one time in the Munchkin Country. Of
course the boy can tell us nothing of his history or his family, for he
has forgotten all that he ever knew.”

“He seems a nice boy, now that all the wickedness has gone from him,”
said Ozma. “So we will keep him here with us and teach him our ways—to
be true and considerate of others.”

“Why, in that case, it’s lucky for him he drank the Water of Oblivion,”
said Dorothy.

“It is indeed,” agreed the Wizard. “But the remarkable thing, to me, is
how such a young boy ever learned the secret of the Magic Word of
Transformation. Perhaps his companion, who is at present this walnut,
was the real magician, although I seem to remember that it was this boy
in the beast’s form who whispered the Magic Word into the hollow tree,
where I overheard it.”

“Well, we will soon know who the other is,” suggested Ozma. “He may
prove to be another Munchkin boy.”

The Wizard placed the walnut near the fountain and said, as slowly and
solemnly as before:

“I want you to resume your natural form, and to be very
thirsty—Pyrzqxgl!”

Then the walnut disappeared and Ruggedo the Nome stood in its place. He
also was facing the fountain, and he reached for the cup, filled it, and
was about to drink when Dorothy exclaimed:

“Why, it’s the old Nome King!”

Ruggedo swung around and faced them, the cup still in his hand.

                             [Illustration]

“Yes,” he said in an angry voice, “it’s the old Nome King, and I’m going
to conquer all Oz and be revenged on you for kicking me out of my
throne.” He looked around a moment, and then continued: “There isn’t an
egg in sight, and I’m stronger than all of you people put together! I
don’t know how I came here, but I’m going to fight the fight of my
life—and I’ll win!”

His long white hair and beard waved in the breeze; his eyes flashed hate
and vengeance, and so astonished and shocked were they by the sudden
appearance of this old enemy of the Oz people that they could only stare
at him in silence and shrink away from his wild glare.

Ruggedo laughed. He drank the water, threw the cup on the ground and
said fiercely:

“And now—and now—and—”

His voice grew gentle. He rubbed his forehead with a puzzled air and
stroked his long beard.

“What was I going to say?” he asked, pleadingly.

“Don’t you remember?” said the Wizard.

“No; I’ve forgotten.”

“Who _are_ you?” asked Dorothy.

He tried to think. “I—I’m sure I don’t know,” he stammered.

“Don’t you know who _we_ are, either?” questioned the girl.

“I haven’t the slightest idea,” said the Nome.

“Tell us who this Munchkin boy is,” suggested Ozma.

Ruggedo looked at the boy and shook his head.

“He’s a stranger to me. You are all strangers. I—I’m a stranger to
myself,” he said.

Then he patted the Lion’s head and murmured, “Good doggie!” and the Lion
growled indignantly.

                             [Illustration]

“What shall we do with him?” asked the Wizard, perplexed.

“Once before the wicked old Nome came here to conquer us, and then, as
now, he drank of the Water of Oblivion and became harmless. But we sent
him back to the Nome Kingdom, where he soon learned the old evil ways
again.”

“For that reason,” said Ozma, “we must find a place for him in the Land
of Oz, and keep him here. For here he can learn no evil and will always
be as innocent of guile as our own people.”

And so the wandering ex-King of the Nomes found a new home, a peaceful
and happy home, where he was quite content and passed his days in
innocent enjoyment.

                        [Illustration: THE END]




                             _The Oz Books_
                                   BY
                             L. FRANK BAUM
                        “Royal Historian of Oz”


                           _The Wizard of Oz_
         [Originally published as _The Wonderful Wizard of Oz_]

It is in this book that Oz is “discovered.” A little Kansas girl—Dorothy
Gale—is carried in her house to Oz when a cyclone whisks it through the
sky. As the house lands in the Munchkin Country (one of the four great
countries of Oz) it destroys a wicked witch and sends Dorothy off on her
first adventure in Oz. She finds the Scarecrow, meets the Tin Woodman
and the Cowardly Lion, melts a second wicked witch with a pail of water
and finds her way home. Since this book appeared a half-century ago, we
have learned many marvelous things about the Land of Oz.


                            _The Land of Oz_
          [Originally published as _The Marvelous Land of Oz_]

This sequel to _The Wizard of Oz_ deals entirely with the early history
of Oz. No one from the United States or any other part of the “great
outside world” appears in it. It takes its readers on a series of
incredible adventures with Tip, a small boy who runs away from old
Mombi, the witch, taking with him Jack Pumpkinhead and the wooden
Saw-Horse. The Scarecrow is King of the Emerald City until he, Tip,
Jack, and the Tin Woodman are forced to flee the royal palace when it is
invaded by General Jinjur and her army of rebelling girls. _The Land of
Oz_ ends with an amazing surprise, and from that moment on Ozma is
princess of all Oz.


                              _Ozma of Oz_

Few of the Oz books are as crowded with exciting Oz happenings as this
one. Not only does it bring Dorothy back to Oz on her second visit, but
it introduces Dorothy to Ozma, relates Ozma’s first important adventure,
and introduces for the first time such famous Oz characters as Tik-Tok,
the mechanical man, Billina the hen, the Hungry Tiger, and—_the Nome
King_! Most of the adventures in this book take place outside Oz, in the
Land of Ev and the Nome Kingdom. Scarcely a page fails to quiver with
excitement, magic and adventure.


                     _Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz_

Of course, everyone always predicted it would happen! And in this book
it does—the Wizard comes back to Oz to stay. Best of all, he comes with
Dorothy, who is having adventure number three that leads her to Oz, this
time via a California earthquake. In this book we meet Dorothy’s pink
kitten, Eureka, whose manners need adjusting badly, and two good friends
who we are sorry did not remain in Oz—Jim the cabhorse, and Zeb,
Dorothy’s young cousin, who works on a ranch as a hired boy.


                            _The Road to Oz_

We like to think of this volume as “The Party Book of Oz.” Almost
everyone loves a party, and when Ozma has a birthday party with notables
from every part of fairyland attending—well! It is just like attending
Ozma’s party in person. You meet the famous of Oz, and lots of others,
such as Queen Zixi of Ix, John Dough, Chick the Cherub, the Queen of
Merryland, Para Bruin the rubber bear and—best of all—Santa Claus
himself! Of course there are lots of adventures on that famous road to
Oz before the party, during which Dorothy, on her way to Oz for the
fourth time, meets such heart-warming characters as the Shaggy Man,
Button-Bright, and lovely Polychrome, daughter of the rainbow.


                        _The Emerald City of Oz_

Here is a “double” story of Oz. While Dorothy, her Aunt Em and Uncle
Henry experience the events that lead to their going to Oz to make their
home in the Emerald City, the wicked Nome King is plotting to conquer Oz
and enslave its people. Later we go with Dorothy and her friends in the
Red Wagon on a grand tour of Oz that is simply packed with excitement
and events. While this transpires, we learn also of the Nome King’s
elaborate preparations to conquer Oz. As Dorothy and her friends return
to the Emerald City, the Nome King and his hordes of warriors are about
to invade it. How Oz is saved is an ending that will amaze and delight
you.


                       _The Patchwork Girl of Oz_

Here, the Patchwork Girl is brought to life by Dr. Pipt’s magic Powder
of Life. From that moment on the action never slows down in this
exciting book. It tells of Ojo’s quest for the strange ingredients
necessary to brew a magic liquid that will release his Unk Nunkie from a
spell—the spell cast by the Liquid of Petrefaction, which has turned him
into a marble statue. In addition to the Patchwork Girl, Ojo and Unk
Nunkie, this book introduces those famous Oz creatures, the Woozy, and
Bungle the glass cat. Oz certainly has become a merrier, happier land
since the Patchwork Girl came to life, and this is the book that tells
how Scraps came to be made, how she was brought to life, and all about
her early adventures.


                            _Tik-Tok of Oz_

For the second time a little girl from the United States comes to Oz.
Betsy Bobbin is shipwrecked in the Nonestic Ocean with her friend Hank
the mule. The two drift to shore in the Rose Kingdom on a fragment of
wreckage. Betsy meets the Shaggy Man and accompanies him to the Nome
Kingdom, where Shaggy hopes to release his brother, a prisoner of the
Nome King. On their way to the Nome Kingdom, one fascinating adventure
follows another. They meet Queen Ann Soforth of Oogaboo and her army,
and lovely Polychrome, who had lost her rainbow again; they rescue
Tik-Tok from a well; and are dropped through a Hollow Tube to the other
side of the world where they meet Quox, the dragon. You’ll find it one
of the most exciting of all the Oz books.


                         _The Scarecrow of Oz_

This is the Oz book which L. Frank Baum considered his best. It starts
quietly enough with Trot and Cap’n Bill rowing along a shore of the
Pacific Ocean to visit one of the many caves near their home on the
California coast. Suddenly, a mighty whirlpool engulfs them. The old
sailorman and the little girl are miraculously saved and regain
consciousness to find themselves in a sea cavern. (To this day, Trot
asserts she felt mermaid arms about her during those terrible moments
under water.) From here on, one perilous adventure crowds in upon
another. In Jinxland they meet the Scarecrow who takes charge of things
once Cap’n Bill is transformed into a tiny grasshopper with a wooden
leg. An exciting royal reception greets the adventurers upon their
return to the Emerald City.


                           _Rinkitink in Oz_

Prince Inga of Pingaree is the boy hero of this fine story of
peril-filled adventure in the islands of the Nonestic Ocean. King
Rinkitink provides comic relief, and by the time you reach the final
page you will love this fat, jolly little king. Bilbil the goat, with
his surly disposition, provides a fine contrast to Rinkitink’s merriment
and Prince Inga’s bravery and courage in the face of danger. Some may
say that the three magic pearls are the real heroes of this story, but
the pearls would have been of little use to King Kitticut and Queen
Garee if Prince Inga hadn’t used them wisely and courageously.


                       _The Lost Princess of Oz_

Talk about _Button-Bright_ getting lost—_Ozma_ is almost as bad! This is
actually the second time Ozma has been lost. As you know, once she was
“lost” for many years. But in this book she is lost for only a short
time. As soon as it is discovered that the ruler of Oz is lost—and with
her all the important magical instruments in Oz—search parties, one for
each of the four countries of Oz, set out to find her. We follow the
adventures of the party headed by Dorothy and the Wizard, who explore
unknown parts of the Winkie Country in search of Ozma. How Ozma is
found, and where she has been, will surprise you. Frogman, a new
character, is introduced in this book.


                        _The Tin Woodman of Oz_

Woot the Wanderer causes this chapter of Oz history to transpire. When
Woot wanders into the splendid tin castle of Nick Chopper, the Tin
Woodman and Emperor of the Winkies, he meets the Scarecrow, who is
visiting his old friend. The Tin Woodman tells Woot the story of how he
had once been a flesh-and-blood woodman in love with a maiden named
Nimmie Aimee. Woot suggests that since the Tin Woodman now has a kind
and loving heart, it is his duty to find Nimmie Aimee and make her
Empress of the Winkies. The Scarecrow agrees, so the three set off to
search for the girl. No less surprising than the adventures encountered
on the journey is Nimmie Aimee’s reception of her former suitor.


                           _The Magic of Oz_

Old Ruggedo, the former Nome King, comes to Oz for the second time, and
makes more trouble than he did on his first visit. Ruggedo never gives
up the idea of conquering Oz, and this time he has the advantage of
being in the country without Ozma’s knowledge. Also, he has the magic
and somewhat grudging help of Kiki Aru, the Munchkin boy who is
illegally practicing the art. If you like magic, then this is a book for
you. There’s magic on every page, and everyone in the story eventually
is transformed into something else, or bewitched in one way or another.
Even the wild animals in the great Forest of Gugu do not escape.


                             _Glinda of Oz_

This is the last Oz book written by L. Frank Baum. It is one of the best
in the series, with Dorothy, Ozma, and Glinda in an adventure that takes
them to an amazing crystal-domed city on an enchanted island. This
island is situated in a lake in the Gillikin Country. Ozma and Glinda
are confronted by powerful magic and determined enemies. For a time
Dorothy and Ozma are prisoners in the crystal-domed city which is able
to submerge below the surface of the lake. Few of the Oz books equal
this one in suspense and mystery—a story that is truly “out of this
world.”

                             [Illustration]

                       [Illustration: Back Cover]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.

--In the text versions, delimited italics text in _underscores_ (the
  HTML version reproduces the font form of the printed book.)







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Magic of Oz, by L. Frank Baum

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC OF OZ ***

***** This file should be named 50194-0.txt or 50194-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/1/9/50194/

Produced by David Edwards, Stephen Hutcheson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

