 FELICITAS.




                             INTRODUCTION.


Some years ago I was at work in Salzburg: in the library among the old
records, and in the Museum of Roman antiquities.

My studies were principally concerned with the fifth century: the time
when the Germanic tribes invaded these regions, the Roman garrisons
retiring with or without resistance, while many settlers remained in
the land. Peasants, trades-people, mechanics, would not forsake their
homes, nor give up their lucrative occupations, would not quit their
valued, long-cherished plots of ground, but stayed under the rule of
the Barbarian; who, when the storm and battle of conquest were over,
and the division of the country completed, did not molest them.

The work of the day over, I wandered in the beautiful, long-familiar
country of the Salzach valley; the warm June evenings permitted long
wanderings up to a late hour. Thought and fancy were filled with the
pictures of the life and the changing fate of the latest Romans in
these lands. My imagination was excited by the inscriptions, coins, and
utensils, by the Roman monuments of every kind which are found in such
rich abundance in and around Salzburg; for this town, with its
prominent fortress, the "Capitolium," on the rocky hill dominating
stream and valley, was for centuries, under the name of "Claudium
Juvavum," a chief bulwark of the Roman rule and the seat of a
flourishing and brilliant development of the Roman culture. The
inscriptions testify to the official rank of many of the citizens, such
as Duumvirs, Decurions, Ædiles of the markets and games; to the
importance of the town as a place of trade, and to the encouragement
given to the arts and manufactures.

That which had occupied me during the labours of the day was pictured
by the play of fancy, when in the evening I wandered out through the
gate of the town: stream and road, hill and valley, were then peopled
for me with forms of the Roman life; and from the distant north-west,
like the driving clouds that often arose from the Bavarian plain,
approached menacingly the invading Germans.

Most frequently, I preferred to saunter along the banks of the stream
in the direction of the great Roman road, which passed the Chiemsee,
and crossing its effluent, the Alz, at Siebruck (Bedaium), and the Inn
(Oenus) at Pfünz (Pons Oeni), led towards the province of Vindelicia
and its splendid capital, Augsburg (Augusta Vindelicorum). Many coins,
fragments of pottery, urns, gravestones, and household utensils of
every kind have been found in the level country which stretches on each
side of the old highroad, and is now for the most part covered with
forest and brushwood, and in some parts overgrown with thick ivy. It is
evident that farms, and also stately villas of the rich citizens, were
thickly scattered beyond the outer wall of the fortified town, thus
filling and adorning the whole valley. I often wandered in the
neighbourhood of this Roman road, the traces of which were still
distinctly visible, watching the setting sun, and wondering what were
the feelings of the inhabitants of these villas, when, instead of the
proud Legions marching by on their way to the Roman town on the Lech,
it was the first weak bands of the Germans from the conquered
Vindelicia who galloped in, carefully reconnoitring; and soon to
be followed by larger masses, more daring, or rather having the
well-grounded confidence that they would find the country only weakly
defended, and would be able to establish themselves as masters over the
defenceless Romans who still remained.

In such fancies, not without the silent wish that I might myself glean
some small memorial of Roman times from this land so rich in
remembrances, I penetrated one evening deeper into the brushwood on the
right of the Roman road, following upwards the course of a small
stream, through a hollow often strewn with broken stones and potsherds,
which moss and ivy had thickly overgrown, and which cracked not seldom,
under my footsteps. I picked up many tiles and bits of pottery. Were
they Roman? No certain evidence could be gathered from _these_.

I determined to-day to follow the rivulet till I should reach its
source, which I imagined to be under the gentle slope of a moderately
high hill; for I knew that the Romans liked to build their quiet villas
as well as their military stations by running water.

It was very hot on that summer day, I was tired in body and mind, and
it was only slowly, and with difficulty, that I could ascend the course
of the brook, forcing my way through the thick and often nearly
impassable bushes by the help of my alpenstock, which I carried with,
me, as I often climbed the mountains in my wanderings.

I could willingly have stretched myself drowsily on the soft inviting
moss; but I resisted the inclination, and determined to press through
and up to the goal I had set myself: the source of the stream.

In half an hour the slope was reached; the height is called by the
people, "the Pagan mound." Along the latter part of the way I had
noticed a striking increase in the number and size of the fragments of
stone; among them also were red and gray marble, like that which had
been quarried in the neighbourhood for unnumbered centuries; and it
was, as I had imagined, close under the crown of the hill the stream
trickled out of the ground.

It appeared to have been once surrounded by masonry; this was in part
still perceptible, carefully polished clear gray marble enclosed it
here and there in a handsome setting, and round about lay scattered
numerous tiles. My heart beat quickly, not only in consequence of the
arduous climb, but also, I confess it, in hopeful expectation, I was
yet very young. Suppose if to-day and here, Mercury, the Roman, or
Wotan, the German god of wishes and discovery, should give into my hand
the long-desired memorial of the Romans of Juvavum; the name "Pagan
mound" gave undoubted evidence of the Roman occupation--for the Roman
road is here called the "Pagan road"--added to this, the source of the
spring, the traces of the marble setting, the many tiles--then the
sun's rays, just before setting, fell across the brushwood and shone
directly on the tile-slab lying before me. Cement! I picked it up and
tested it; it was without doubt that Roman cement which, becoming hard
as stone during the lapse of centuries, so marks out the buildings of
eternal Rome, I turned the piece over; there, O joy! was burnt in the
undoubted motto of the Twenty-second Legion: _Primigenia pia fidelis!_
And as I bend down, highly pleased, to try the next brick, a yet
stronger sunbeam falls on a piece of peculiar light-gray stone. It is
marble, I see now, and on the surface there are three Roman letters
distinctly visible: "hic...." There the stone was broken; but close to
it, the broken edge of a similar piece of gray stone projected from the
moss and ivy. Does the continuation of the inscription lie here buried
under a covering of moss and turf?

I pulled at the stone, but it was too heavy, either from the load of
earth or from its own size.

After some useless efforts, I found that I must clear off the layers of
turf and moss before the marble would entrust me with its secret.

Had it one to narrate? Certainly! I held the commencement in my hand:
"Hic," "here"--_what_ had here taken place, or was here attested?

After I had with my pocket-knife cleared the first piece from earth and
root-fibres, I held its broken surface to that of the still covered
slab; they fitted very well together. Then I set to work; it was not
easy, not soon over; with hand, knife, and the point of my alpenstock,
I had to scrape and tear away fully two feet of turf, earth, moss, and,
toughest of all, the numerous little roots of the clasping ivy;
although the sun was setting and the breeze was cool, the labour made
me very hot; the perspiration fell from my brow on the old Roman stone,
which now showed itself as a tolerably long slab. After the first few
minutes my zeal was sharpened by perceiving more letters. It was at
last so far laid bare that I could take hold of the edges with both
hands, and with some little jerks bring it fully to view. I then held
the broken stone with the deciphered _hic_ against it; this gave me the
direction in which farther to search.

I hastily scraped away earth, stones, and moss from the cutting of the
letters, for it was quickly getting darker, and I wished to make out at
once the long-buried secret. I succeeded; without question, though
certainly with difficulty, I read the inscription, in two lines under
each other:

            Hic habitat Felicit...
            Nihil mali intret.

The two last letters of the third word alone were missing; the stone
was here broken away, and its companion piece was not to be found; but
it was self-evident that the missing letters were--as--the inscription
meant:

            Here dwells happiness;
            May nothing evil enter in.

Clearly the gray marble slab had formed the threshold of the entrance
to the garden or porch of the villa; and the adage expressed the wish
that all evil might be kept far from the door.

I sought in vain for yet farther traces, for remains of household
utensils.

Pleased and satisfied with the discovery of the pretty proverb, I then
rested.

Wiping my heated brow, I sat down on the soft moss by my work, thinking
again and again of the words; I supported my back against an old oak,
which had grown up out of the rubbish of the house, or, perhaps, out of
the good mould of the little garden.

A wondrous quiet reigned over the hill, which was quite separated from
the world by trees and bushes.

Only very, very faintly one heard the trickling of the small, scanty
vein of water which came out of the earth close by me, and only
sometimes, when it found a quicker fall, rippled more strongly. Once,
no doubt, when handsomely enclosed in the clear gray marble, it had
spoken loader.

In the distance, on the summit of a high beech, the golden oriole sang
its flute-like evening song, which told of still deeper forest
loneliness, for the listener seldom hears the notes of the "Pirol,"
except in such a solitude. Bees hummed here and there over the mossy
carpet, coming out of the dark thicket and seeking the warmer light,
sleepy themselves and lulling to sleep with their humming.

I thought, whose "happiness" once dwelt here? And has the wish of the
inscription been fulfilled? Was the proverb powerful enough to keep off
all evil? The stone which bore it is broken--a bad sign. And what kind
of happiness was this? But stay! At that time Felicitas occurs as a
_woman's name_; perhaps the proverb, with a graceful double meaning,
would say: "Here dwells happiness; that is to say, my Felicitas; may
nothing evil come over her, over our threshold!"

But "Felicitas"--who was she? and who was he, whose happiness she had
been, and what had become of them? And this villa, how----?

This was my last waking thought, for with the last question I fell
asleep.

And long did I slumber; for when the song of the nightingale, loudly
exultant, close to my ear, awoke me, it was dark night; a single star
shone through the branches of the oak. I sprang up: "Felicitas!
Fulvius!" I cried, "Liuthari! Felicitas! where are they?"

"Felicitas!" softly repeated the echo from the hill. All else was still
and dark.

So was it a dream?

Now, _this_ dream I will retain.

Felicitas, I hold thee!

Thou shalt not escape me.

Poetical fancy can immortalise thee.

And I hastened home, and the same night noted down the history which I
had dreamt among the ruins of the old Roman villa.




                               CHAPTER I.


It was a beautiful evening in June, The sun threw its golden beams from
the west, from Vindelicia, on the Mercurius Hill, and the modest villa
which crowned it.

Here and there on the great street a two-wheeled cart, drawn by a yoke
of Noric oxen, was returning home at the close of the market-day
through the west gate of Juvavum, the _Porta Vindelica_. The colonists
and peasants had been selling vegetables, fowls, and pigeons in the
Forum of Hercules; but the bustle of the street reached the hill only
as a murmur. Here it was still and quiet; one only heard outside the
low stone wall which surrounded the garden the lively rippling of a
little spring, which at its source was prettily enclosed in marble, and
after it had fed the fountain in the middle, and had wandered through
the garden in artificially winding rivulets, escaped through a gap in
the wall and hurried down the hill in a stone channel. Close by was the
gate entrance, surmounted by a statue of Mercury, but open, without
door or lattice. In the direction of the town, towards the south-east,
there lay at the foot of the hill carefully tended vegetable and fruit
gardens, meadows with the most succulent verdure, and corn-fields with
luxuriant grain, which products the Romans had brought into the land of
the barbarians.

Behind the villa, towards the north, fine beech-woods towered and
rustled, ascending the mountain slopes; and out of their depths sounded
from afar the metallic note of the golden oriole.

It was so beautiful, so peaceful; but from the west--and no less from
the south-east!--threatening storm-clouds were rising.

From the entrance a straight path, strewn with white sand, led through
the wide-spreading garden, between tall ilices and yews, which
according to the long ruling fashion had been cut into all kinds of
geometrical figures--a taste, or rather want of taste, which the Rococo
did not invent, but only newly borrowed from the gardens of the
Imperators.

Statues were placed at regular intervals in the space between the
garden gate and the entrance to the dwelling-house: nymphs, a Flora, a
satyr, a Mercury--bad work in plaster; the stout Crispus made them by
the dozen in his workshop on the Vulcan market-place in Juvavum; and he
sold them cheap: for the times were not good for _men_, and were bad
for gods and demi-gods; but these were all gifts, for Crispus was the
father's brother of the young householder.

From the entrance of the garden, echoing from the stone wall of the
enclosure, there sounded several strokes of a hammer, only lightly, for
they were given carefully by an artist-hand; they seemed to be the last
improving, finishing efforts of a master.

Now the hammerer sprang up; he had been kneeling just within the
entrance, near to which, standing upright against each other, were some
dozen yet unworked marble slabs, which pointed out the dwelling of a
stone-mason. He stuck the little hammer into the leather belt which
fastened the skin apron over his blue tunic, shook from a little
oil-flask a few drops on a woollen cloth, rubbed therewith the marble
till it was smooth as a mirror, turned his head aside, as a bird will
that wishes to look closely at anything, and then, nodding well
pleased, read from the slab at the entrance:

"Yes, yes! here dwells happiness; _my_ happiness, _our_ happiness: so
long as my Felicitas dwells here--happy and making happy. May
misfortune never step over this threshold: banished by the adage, may
every bad spirit Halt! Now is the house beautifully finished by this
inscription. But where is she, then? She must see it and praise me.
Felicitas," cried he, turning towards the house, "come then!"

He wiped the sweat from his brow, and stood upright--a supple, youthful
form, slender, not above the middle height, not unlike the Mercury of
the garden, whose proportions Crispus had formed according to old
tradition; dark-brown hair, in short curls, covered almost like a cap
his round head; under large eyebrows, two dark eyes laughed pleasantly
on the world; the naked feet and arms showed a fine shape, but little
strength; only in the right arm powerful muscles raised themselves; the
brown skin apron was sprinkled white with marble dust, he shook it off,
and cried again louder, "Felicitas!"

Then appeared on the threshold of the house a white figure, who,
drawing back the dark-yellow curtain, which was fastened to rings
running on a bronze rod, was framed like a picture in the two pilasters
of the entrance--a quite young girl--or was it a young wife? Yes, she
must be already a wife, this child of hardly seventeen years, for she
is without doubt the mother of the infant which, with her left arm, she
nestles to her bosom: only the mother holds a child with such
expression in the movements and countenance. Two fingers of the right
hand, the inner surface turned outwards, the young mother laid on her
lips: "Be quiet!" said she, "our child sleeps." And now the hardly
full-ripe form glided down the four stone steps which led from the
house into the garden, with the left arm carefully raising the child
higher and pressing it closer, with the right gently lifting the hem of
her plaited robe as high as her well-formed ankles. It was a spectacle
of perfect grace: young and childlike, like Raphael's Madonna, but not
humble and at the same time mystically glorious, as the mother of the
Christ-child; there was nothing incomprehensible, nothing miraculous,
only a noble simplicity and yet royal loftiness in her unconscious
dignity and innocence. There floated, as it were, a sweet-sounding
music round the figure of this Hebe, every movement being in perfect
harmony; wife and yet maiden; entirely human, perfectly at rest and
contented in the love of her young husband and of the child at her
breast. Lovely, touching, and dignified at the same time, in all the
perfect beauty of her figure, her face and her complexion so modest,
that in her presence, as before a beautiful statue, every wish was
silent.

She wore no ornament; her light-brown hair, shining with a golden
lustre when the sun kissed it, flowed back in natural waves from the
open, well-formed temples, leaving the rather low forehead free, and
was fastened at her neck in a loose knot. A milk-white robe of the
finest wool, fastened on the left shoulder with a beautifully shaped,
but simple silver brooch, hung in folds down to her ankles, showing the
pretty red leather sandals; leaving bare the neck and arms, which were
still childlike, but rather too long. The robe was fastened at the
waist with a wide bronze girdle.

Thus she moved silently down the steps, and approached her husband. The
long narrow face had that wonderful, almost bluish-white, complexion
only possessed by the daughters of Ionia, and which no noon-tide sun of
the south can embrown; the eye-brows, in a half-circle, regular as if
drawn with compasses, might have given to the countenance a lifeless,
statuesque appearance, but under the long, slightly curved, black
eye-lashes, the dark-brown gazelle-like eyes, now directed towards her
beloved, shone with a life full of feeling.

He flew towards her with an elastic step, lifted carefully, tenderly,
the sleeping child from her arm, and taking the flat straw lid from his
tool-basket, he placed the child on it, under the shade of a rose-bush.
The evening breeze threw the scented leaves of a full-blown rose on the
little one: he smiled in his sleep.

Then the master, winding his arm round the waist of his young wife, led
her to the just completed entrance-slab, and said:

"Now is the proverb ready, which I have kept hidden from thee till I
could finish it; now read, and know, and feel"--and he kissed her
tenderly on the mouth: "Thou--thou thyself art the happiness; _Thou_
dwellest here."

The young wife held her hand before her eyes to protect them from the
sun, which now shone in almost horizontal beams through the open
gateway; she read and blushed, the colour rose perceptibly in her
delicate white cheeks, her bosom heaved, her heart beat quickly: "O
Fulvius! thou art good. How thou dost love me! How happy we are!" And
she laid her two hands and arms on his right shoulder, on the other her
beautiful head.

He heartily pressed her to himself. "Yes, overflowing, without shadow
is our happiness--without measure or end."

Quickly, with a slight trembling, as if shivering, she raised herself,
and looked him anxiously in the face: "O, do not provoke the holy ones.
It is whispered," said she, herself whispering, "they are envious." And
she held her hand before his mouth.

But he pressed a loud kiss upon the small fingers, and cried: "I am not
jealous, I, a _man_--why should the holy ones be envious? I do not
believe that. I do not believe it of the holy ones--nor of the heathen
gods, if indeed they still have life and power."

"Speak not of them! They certainly live!--but they are bad spirits, and
he who names them, he calls them near; thus warns the Presbyter of the
Basilica."

"I fear them not. They have protected our ancestors for many
generations."

"Yes, but we have turned away from them! They defend us no longer. Only
the saints are our defenders against the barbarians. Alas! if they came
here, trampled down the flowers in the garden, and carried away our
child."

And she knelt down and kissed the little sleeper.

But the young father laughed. "The Germans, dost thou mean? they steal
no children! They have more than they can feed. But it is true----they
may perhaps one day sound out their war-cry before the gates of
Juvavum."

"Yes, that they may, very soon!" broke in an anxious voice, and the fat
Crispus, breathing heavily after his hot walk, entered the garden.

"Ave, Phidias in plaster," cried Fulvius to him.

"Welcome, uncle," said Felicitas, giving him her hand.

The broad-brimmed felt hat which he had drawn over his brow to protect
his red, fat, shining, good-humoured face, and his stump nose, from the
sun, Crispus threw on his neck, so that it hung by the leather strap on
his broad back. "May Hygeia never leave thee, my daughter; the Graces
never forsake thee, their fourth sister. Yes, the Germans! A horseman
came last night with secret information for the Tribune. But two hours
after we knew it all, we, early guests at the Baths of Amphitrite. The
rider is a Wascon; no Wascon keeps his mouth closed if you pour wine
therein. A battle has been fought at the ford of the Isar: our troops
have fled, the watch-tower of Vada is burnt. The barbarians have
crossed the river."

"Bah!" laughed Fulvius, "that is yet far away. Go, darling, prepare a
cooling drink for our uncle--thou knowest what he likes: not too much
water! And _if_ they come, they will not eat us. They are fierce giants
in battle--children after the victory. Have I not lived months among
them as their prisoner? I fear nothing from them."

"Nothing for thyself--but for this sweet wife?"

Felicitas did not hear this question; she had taken up the child and
gone with it into the house.

Fulvius shook his curly locks. "No! They would do nothing to her, that
is not their custom. Certainly, did I fall, she would not be long left
a widow. But there are people not in the bearskins of the barbarians,
who would willingly tear her from the arms of her husband."

And he seized angrily the hammer in his belt.

"She must not suspect anything of it, the pure heart!" continued he.

"Certainly not. But thou must be on the watch. I met the Tribune lately
in the office of the old money-lender."

"The usurer! the blood-sucker!"

"I was able, fortunately, to pay him my little debt. The slave
announced me. I waited behind the curtain: I then heard a deep voice
mention thy name--and Felicitas. I entered. The Tribune stood with the
money-dealer. They were quickly silent when they perceived me. And just
now, on the way here, whom should I overtake on the highway? Leo the
Tribune, and Zeno the money-dealer! The latter pointed with his staff
to thy house, the flat roof of which, with its little statues,
projected above the trees. I guessed their conversation, and the object
of their journey. Unseen I sprang from the road into the ditch, and
hastened by the shorter way, the steep meadow path, to warn thee. Take
care--they will soon be here."

"Let him only come, the miser! I have earned and carefully put away the
sum that I owe him for marble supplied from Aquileia, and for the town
taxes. My other creditors I have asked to wait, or rather promised them
higher interest, and have put all the money together for this
destroyer. But what does the Tribune want with me? I owe him nothing,
except a knife-thrust for the look with which he devoured my precious
one."

"Be careful! _His_ knife is more powerful: it is the sword; and behind
him stand the wild Mauritanian cavalry, and the Isaurian hirelings,
whom we must pay with precious gold to protect us from the barbarians."

"But who defends us from the defenders? The Emperor in distant Ravenna?
He rejoices if the Germans do not cross the Alps; he troubles himself
no more about this land, which has been so long Roman."

"Except in extortionate taxes, to squeeze out our last blood-drops."

"Bah! The State taxes! It is many years since they were collected. No
Imperial functionary ventures now over the mountains. I stand indeed
here on Imperial soil. But what is the name of the man who is now
Emperor, and to whom this bit of land belongs, of which he has never
heard? Every two years another Emperor is made known to us--but only
through the coinage."

"And that becomes ever worse."

"It _cannot_ get worse; that is a comfort."

"A friend tells me that the taxes get more and more intolerable in
Mediolanum, where there are still bailiffs and soldiers to levy them by
force."

"And it may be the same with us," laughed the young man. "Who knows how
much I am already in debt for these two acres of land?"

"And the roads of the Legions are overgrown with grass and brushwood."

"And the troops receive no wages."

"But they pay themselves by plundering the burghers, whom they should
defend."

"And the walls of Juvavum are falling, the moats are dry, the sluices
destroyed; the rich people go away, there only remain poor wretches
like ourselves, who cannot leave."

"I wonder that the money-lender has not long ago moved with his great
gold-bag over the Alps."

"I would not go, uncle, if I could; and why, indeed, could I not? My
art, my trade will be honoured everywhere, so long as the Romans dwell
in stone, not wooden houses, like the Germans. But I am firmly fixed to
this soil. Many, many generations have my fathers dwelt here; they say
since the founding of the colony by the Emperor Hadrian. They have
cleared the forests, drained the marshes, made roads, raised fords,
laid out house and garden, grafted the rich fruits on the wild apple
and pear-trees; the climate itself has become milder. I know Italy, I
have bought marble in Venetia, but I would rather live here on the old
inheritance of my fathers."

"But if the barbarians come, wilt thou then also?"----

"Stay! I have my own thoughts about that. For us unimportant people it
is better under the barbarians than"----

"Say not, than under the Emperor. Thou art a Roman!"

The stout Crispus said this very gravely, but the other laughed; the
good uncle but little resembled a Roman hero. His neighbours declared
that he modelled his statues of Bacchus from his own figure.

"Half-blood! My mother was a Noric Celt. Induciomara! That does not
sound much of the Quirinal."

"And we do not stand under the Emperor, but under his hangman servants,
Exchequer officials, and under the murderous fist of the Moorish and
Isaurian troops. If I must serve barbarians, I prefer the Germans."

"But they are heathen."

"In part. A hundred and fifty years ago so were we all. My grandfather
sacrificed secretly to Jupiter. And there are also Christians among
them."

"Arians! heretics! worse than heathen, says the Holy Church."

"A few decades past our emperors were also heretics. And the Germans
ask no one what he believes; but how heavily did our fathers suffer, if
their faith did not exactly agree with that of the ruling emperor!"

"You take too lenient a view of the coming of the barbarians. They have
set fire to many towns."

"Yes; but stone does not burn. The Romans quickly fit new timbers in
the undestroyed walls. Then no German settles in a town. They pasture
their herds on the land; it is the peasant in his farm who suffers from
them. They take from him a third of his fields and pasturage. But the
land profits thereby. It is now sadly dispeopled; nowhere is there a
free peasant on a free soil. For the masters, whom they never see, who
carouse in Naples or Byzantium, _slaves_ cultivate the ground, or
rather they do _not_ cultivate it, they only work enough to keep them
from starving. If they gained more the slave-master would take it from
them. But it is different with plough and sickle, when hundreds of
Germans press into the country, each with innumerable white-headed
children. For so many children as _these_ people have, I could not have
imagined over the whole earth!--And in a few years the grown-up son
builds his own wooden house in the cleared forest or the drained swamp.
They swarm over the furrows like ants, and they soon throw away their
old wooden plough-shares and copy the iron shares of the colonists, and
in a few years the land bears so much more than formerly, that it
richly feeds both conquerors and conquered."

"Yes, yes," nodded Crispus, "we have seen all that in the frontier
lands, where they have settled. If the sons become too numerous they
cast lots, and the third part, that draws the lot to migrate, wanders
on wherever hawk or wolf directs; but never back, never towards the
north!" sighed Crispus, "so they press ever nearer to us."----

"But they leave us our laws, our language, our God, our Basilica, and
demand much, much less in tribute than the slave-master of the landlord
or the tax-gatherer of the Emperor."

"It is well that Severus does not hear you, the old _armaturarum
magister_ in Juvavum; he would"----

"Yes, he thinks we have yet the old times, and there are still living
the old Romans as in the days of that tamer of the Germans, the Emperor
Probus, of whose race he counts himself. But by the saints he is
mistaken. Why should I be over zealous for the Emperor? He, this
Emperor, certainly shows no zeal for me; in strong Ravenna he sits and
invents new taxes, and new punishments for those who pay no taxes,
because they have nothing."

"The old Severus has long been drilling volunteers to lead against the
barbarians, in case they should roam this way. I have been there a few
days, painfully carrying spear and shield in this heat. I have never
seen thee, so much younger and stronger, on our '_Campus Martius_,' as
they call it."

Fulvius laughed. "I have no need, uncle; I have learnt to use arms long
enough while a prisoner with the Germans, and if the town and one's own
hearth must be defended I shall not be wanting--for honour's sake! not
that I think we shall do much; for, believe me, if they seriously
intend to come, that is, if they _must_ because they _need_ our acres,
then Severus will not keep them back with his old-fashioned generalship
and his new-fashioned 'Legions of the Capitol of Juvavum,' under the
golden eagle which he has presented to them. Nor the Tribune either
with his cavalry from Africa and his mercenaries from Isauria. But
look! Philemon, the slave, is beckoning; I see the drinking-cup shining
on the seat in the little porch--the table is ready. Now drink of our
rough Räter-wine; Augustus long ago knew how to value it, and it has
been already a year in the cellar since the pack-mule brought it here
from the Tyrol. Let us look at Felicitas and the child at her breast,
and forget emperors and barbarians."




                              CHAPTER II.


Meanwhile, slowly walking up the high-road, the two men whom Crispus
had announced were approaching the villa; they often stood still,
interrupting their progress with an animated conversation.

"No, no," warned the money-dealer, shaking his bald head, which, in
spite of the sun, was uncovered, and striking with his staff on the
hard road, "such haste, such violence, such impetuosity, as thy
passionate longing craves, will not answer, O friend Tribune. Only
leave me alone! We are on the right, the safe way."

"Thy way is a crooked, weary, roundabout way, a snail-pace," cried the
soldier impatiently, and he threw back his proud head so that the black
plume of his helmet rustled on the links of his armour. "To what
purpose are these ceremonies? They do not hasten the time when you
shall add the little property to your vast possessions. And I--I cannot
sleep since the sight of this young woman has inflamed my passions. My
heart beats to breaking. All night I toss on my hot couch. By the
ungirdled Astarte of Tripolis! I _will_ have this slender Felicitas!
And I _must_ have her, or my veins will burst." And his fiery black
eyes flashed.

"Thou shalt have her, only patience."

"No! no patience. A sword-thrust will make the milk-sop of a husband
cold; in these arms will I lift the struggling one on Pluto, my black
horse, and quick to the Capitol, even if all the market-women of
Juvavum raise an outcry behind me."

"Murder and rape! Thou knowest the punishment."

"Bah! Would an accuser come forward? And the Emperor? The Emperor of
_Juvavum_--is myself. Let us see who will climb the walls of my
Capitolium."

"The Cross, my roaring Leo, the Cross and the Presbyter. No, no, it
must not be an open sin crying to heaven. True, the Judge and his
lictors are weak in this land, which is almost given up by Rome. But
the Church is so much the stronger. If the haggard, white-bearded
Johannes thrust thee out, thou art a lost man. No pound of meat, no cup
of wine, will the people of Juvavum again sell to thee."

"I will take what I need with my lancers."

"But thy lancers are Mauritanians: pious Christians, baptised by the
Presbyter. See if they will follow, if the old man have cursed thee."

"I will strike him dead after, or rather, before the curse," cried the
officer, and he made a quick step forwards; his long dark-red mantle
floated in the wind.

But the money-changer again stopped, adjusting with his bony fingers
his yellow tunic.

"How useless! Dost thou not know that _they_ are immortal? If thou
strikest _one_ dead, the Bishop sends another. And they are all
alike--much more than thy soldiers resemble each other. And I--I would
not look at thee across the street if thou wert thrust out from the
Holy Church."

But now the soldier stopped and laughed aloud: "Thou! Zeno of
Byzantium! Thou believest as little in the Holy Church as Leo himself.
And it is my opinion, that thy soul-destroying usury is not regarded
more favourably by the saints, than my trifle of pleasure in love and
murder. What hast thou to do with the Church?"

"I will tell thee, thou rash son of Mars. I _fear_ her! She is the only
power now left in these lands. The Emperor is far away, his officers
are all venal; the barbarians are like the storm, they bluster around
us, we bend to them, and they again bluster away; but the Church is
everywhere, even if only a single priest says mass in a half-ruined
house of prayer. And the priest is not to be bought. The miserable
creature dares not live like a man, so he needs nothing; and all who
hope for heaven follow him, that is to say: all fools. But woe to the
man who has the fools against him--he is lost. No, no! we must not
rouse the Church against us."

"I need him yet, the sneak!" grated Leo through his teeth, with an
angry look at his companion; and he impatiently pushed aside his short,
broad sword in the finely-worked scabbard.

"For that reason truly, I have to serve you," continued the merchant.

"For a good reward," interrupted Leo scornfully.

"But which, alas! I have yet only received in half."

"The other half when I have the gazelle-eyed beauty in my chamber."

"For that reason I have taken all this trouble, woven all these meshes,
and gathered them in my hand; one jerk, and the net closes over the
head of the stone-mason; he and the sweet nymph struggle therein,
defenceless, powerless, and best of all, without a right. Emperor and
Church can look on whilst thou seizest the bird, and I the land. Not
that it is valuable; but it rounds off my fields here. I can then more
easily sell the whole to a great lord in Italy."

"I also do not intend to keep the fragile creature long; only through
the autumn and winter. When the slave-dealers come here in summer from
Antioch, I shall sell her at a high price. This half-bluish white of
the eyes is much sought for. Whence has she it?"

"From Hellas or Ionia. Her parents were slaves of a Greek trader in
purple, who died here on the return journey from Pannonia. They declare
that the old man set them free before his death; they then carried on a
little trade in salt. When they also died, the child became the wife of
their neighbour's son, the stone-mason, who had grown up with her. I am
eager to know if they have preserved the letter of emancipation. If
not, then good-night, Felicitas! We are now at our goal; the foot-path
here turns down, from the main road towards the Mercurius Hill.
Moderate, I beseech thee, the violence and the eagerness in thine eyes,
or thou wilt spoil all."

"I have not been born or trained to wait."

Thereupon the Tribune approached the open entrance of the garden. Zeno
followed slowly. The setting sun threw its beams fully on the
threshold-stone and the newly-cut inscription.

"Hic habitat Felicitas!" read the Tribune. "For yet how long?" asked
he, laughing.

"Nihil mali intret!" concluded the merchant. "It is well that wishes
are not bolts."

"Or _we_ should not come in!" said the other; and he trod scornfully
with a quick step on the neat letters. These were rubbed smooth as a
mirror with fresh oil. Leo's foot slipped, he staggered, tried to
recover himself, stumbled again, and fell with a cry of pain on the
stone slab, helmet and armour loudly rattling.




                              CHAPTER III.


Immediately, before his companion could stretch forth a hand to help
him, the enraged man had tried to rise, but with a wild curse he sank
again to the ground, and repelled vehemently the attempt of the other
to assist him.

"Let me lie; the foot is broken or the ankle is sprained. No, it is the
knee. I do not know. But I cannot stand--I must be carried."

"I will call the people of the house. The stone-mason is coming
already."

"I will strike him dead if he touches me. I will have no help from him.
On the other side of the road to the left I saw some of my people
spear-throwing on the drill-ground. Call them to me, they shall carry
me away."

And this was done.

While the money-changer had gone for the soldiers Fulvius came forward,
but the Tribune turned away from him and would not speak; silent,
suppressing any utterance of pain, he was carried by the strong Moors
into the town, where they soon obtained a litter and took him to the
Capitol.

In the meanwhile Fulvius had stopped the merchant at the entrance. "Not
over the threshold, most excellent man!" said he, pushing him back. "I
am superstitious; thou hast an evil look. As soon as I caught sight of
thee and the Tribune I hastened to meet you, bringing the money which
lies in that bag ready counted for thee. Here"----and he began to count
out the silver money on the broad coping of the low wall. "Here, count
then! It is reckoned correctly: fifty solidi principal, and at thirty
per cent, interest, fifteen solidi more. And here--for I cannot
transact business with thee without a receipt--on this wax tablet I
have written the acquittance. Take the style, put thy name to it, and
go thy way, never to return."

But with his lean hand Zeno pushed back disdainfully the silver pieces,
so that they fell rattling on the stone slab and rolled round about.

"We do not separate so quickly, hospitable landlord and grateful
debtor."

"Grateful! Thirty per cent, is, I think, thanks enough, and one is not
hospitable to harpies and vampires. Take what belongs to thee and go!"

"When I have taken that which belongs to me," answered the Byzantiner
fiercely, "then, not I, but _thou_, wilt go out of this house--out of
this whole property."

"What does that mean?"

"That means, that my business is not merely with the fifty miserable
solidi with interest. Thou art my debtor for more than twenty times
that sum; mine is the house, mine the whole possession, most probably
thyself also, at this moment, with every bone in thy body; mine also
that slave daughter, who peeps anxiously there between the curtains,
with the child at her breast. Mother-sheep and lamb are my own."

So maliciously were these words uttered, at first lightly whispered,
then in rising anger, ever louder and more threatening, that Fulvius,
alarmed, looked back to see if his young wife had perceived this
disaster.

But Felicitas had again disappeared behind the curtain, satisfied that
the wild officer, whom she feared, she knew not why, was no longer
there. She knew well that the money was ready for the usurer.

Smiling, she bade farewell to her guest, who had emptied his beaker and
now took his departure. Not a cloud overshadowed her white brow as she
now sat down on the couch, and with a sweet smile on her maiden-like
countenance raised the waking child, and proceeded to give it
nourishment.

Zeno still delaying, Fulvius in fear and anger pushed him with his
elbow a step farther from the entrance; the muscles of his naked arms
tightened, his hands clenched; threatening but speechless, he stood
before the man who had spoken such fearful words.

Crispus now came forward; he seized his young nephew firmly by the
wrist of his right arm, which he was slowly raising for a blow.

"What means this?" cried the fat uncle, anxiously.

Fulvius spoke not a word.

But Zeno answered: "This means, that I have bought this property from
the Imperial Exchequer, with all the old claims for State taxes, and
seven times the rent due to the Emperor, for which, according to the
accounts, this tenant and his father are many decades in arrear; this
makes, together with the fines, a debt of seven thousand solidi."

Crispus calculated in an instant that if even he gave his whole
possessions to save his nephew, they would not amount to a seventh part
of this sum.

"That means," continued Zeno, "that as there is no doubt about the
inability of the debtor to pay, I claim him as my slave for debt, and
shall to-morrow be installed by the magistrate into the property."

"Oh, Felicitas!" groaned Fulvius.

"Be calm; I will take mother and child home with me till the suit is
decided," comforted the good-natured uncle.

"Law-suit?" laughed Zeno. "A suit that begins with its accomplishment
is quickly decided. My claim is indubitably shown by the Imperial
tax-rolls; they give positive evidence, and that young creature"----

"Wilt thou also claim the wife for the debt of her husband? That is not
Roman justice," cried Crispus.

"Stay with thy ridiculous statues, and do not teach me justice and its
ways. The young wife is a slave-child, the property of the master of
her parents. This man died without a will, without assignable heirs.
His property fell to the Exchequer; to the Exchequer belonged the
parents and belongs the child."

"The old Krates set the parents and the child free before his death."

"Where is the letter of emancipation?"

And when both were silent the usurer continued in a triumphant tone:
"You are silent? It is, then, as I suspected: the papyrus was destroyed
when her parents' house was burnt in the rising of the people against
the tax-collectors. Her birth as a slave is undisputed, the letter of
emancipation is not forthcoming, therefore she and her slave-brood are
mine."

The young husband was overcome with passion and anguish, and a blow
with his fist on the breast of the villain sent him staggering
backwards. "Hast thou, then, thou old sinner, purchased my wife in
advance from the Fiscus, as thou hast also me and my house?"

"No," said he, exasperated, "the beautiful Greek belongs to a handsome
young lord, who suits her better. A lion will soon drag her to his den.
Thou knowest well what kind of suitor the lion is."

"The Tribune!" cried Fulvius. "I will strangle him first with these
fists; and thou, panderer, take"----

But Crispus slung both arms around him, holding him fast.

So Zeno gained time to make his escape. He quickly mounted the path
which led to the main road; when he had gained the height he turned and
looked through the bushes at the villa. He raised his fist menacingly,
and cried to the two men, "Woe to the vanquished!"




                              CHAPTER IV.


Crispus then turned to go towards the house.

"What dost thou wish to do?? asked Fulvius.

"To ask Felicitas if there is no writing, no evidence of
emancipation"----but the young husband stopped him.

"No, no! She must know nothing about it. The poor, tender, helpless,
happy child! It would crush her--this horrid plot!"

"How wilt thou prevent her knowing it, when it will to-morrow be
carried out? For I do not doubt it is all correct what the usurer says
of the tax-dues and of his purchase of the property. And that is not
the worst. Thou canst fly, as so many thousand debtors have already, to
the mountains, to the forests, to the barbarians, for aught I care.
Leave him here the heap of stones."

"The house of my parents! the place where we have been so happy!"

"You can be happy elsewhere, when you come together again. But
Felicitas with the infant--she cannot yet share thy flight. She must
stay, and _can_ stay with me. And that, I hope, can be arranged; for I
have no doubt about the emancipation. The old people did not fabricate
it. It is only the evidence that we want--the evidence!"

"The letter of emancipation is burnt; that is certain; burnt with the
few ornaments and savings of the parents. They often told us about it.
They had put all their valuables in a little box of cedar-wood, under
the cushions of the bed, in their own room. In the night that the
despairing tax-debtors and the peasants, the beasts of burden of the
great landlords, had broken out in riot, the old people had, with the
child, hastened into the street to inquire the cause of the fearful
noise. They ran forward to the corner of the Vulcan market. Another
crowd of fighting peasants and soldiers then poured in from behind,
cutting off their return. The wooden storehouses of the small tradesmen
that lived there, were set on fire. It was two days before they could
return to their house, and then it was almost entirely burnt out; under
the half-carbonised cushions of the bed, they found two melted gold
pieces and the iron mounting of the cedar-box, yet glowing, and round
about ashes:--from the wood of the box and its contents."

"The writing was not to be found?"

"In the house of her parents, certainly not; we searched it thoroughly
before we sold it, after the death of the old people."

"Among the records of the Curies?"

"The freedom was given by letter, not by will. Krates intended to leave
a will, but was overtaken by death before he had carried out his
intention."

"Witnesses?"

"There were none. I tell you the freedom was given by letter."

"There is, then, no evidence. It is fearful."

"It makes one despair."

"But what thoughtlessness to live long years without"----

"Long years? It is not yet one year that I have called her mine.
Before that it was the care of the parents; but these good old
people--strangers here--what could they do? They could not awake the
dead master, that he might repeat the emancipation."

"Had no one else read the letter?"

"Possibly! But these could only witness that they had read it, not that
it was genuine."

"I see no escape but in flight--hasty flight."

"Hasty flight with the infant, and the young mother hardly
convalescent, is impossible. And to fly! it is not my custom. Rather
resistance by force."

"Thou, and I, and the lame Philemon, the force against the lancers of
the Tribune! For he stands behind."

"I believe it! I saw his passionate look rest on her--on her neck--I
could throttle him!"

"You are a dead man before you raise a hand against him."

"It is dark, hopeless night around us. Oh, where shall we find counsel,
where a beam of hope, of light?"

"In the Church," spoke softly, but decidedly, a sweet voice. Felicitas
put her arm round the neck of her beloved.

"Thou!"

"Thou here?"

"Yes, as thou didst not come back, I sought for thee; it is always so
between us. The boy sleeps; I laid him in my bed. I found you both so
deep in conversation, that you did not hear my step on the soft garden
sand."

"What hast thou heard?" cried Fulvius, full of fear.

But the radiant, cheerful face, the smooth brow, the happy smile of his
young wife, soon quieted his anxiety.

"I only heard that you wanted light in the darkness, and there came
into my mind, as always, the word 'Church,' the name 'Johannes.'"

Fulvius was satisfied, almost joyful, because she had heard nothing of
the lurking misfortune. He stroked tenderly her beautifully arched
head, and said:

"And yet thou art not one of those devotees whose piety, or rather
hypocrisy, peeps through the knees of their garments, worn threadbare
by the altar steps."

"No; I am, alas, not pious enough. But it does not help me if I do go
often to confession. Johannes always smiles when I have finished, and
says: 'Thou hast only _one_ sin; that is, Falvius.' But when I hear of
darkness and light, I always think of the Church and Johannes. It is an
experience of my earliest childhood," said she slowly, reflectively.

"What experience?" asked Crispus, becoming attentive.

"I had been obliged for many weeks, on account of a disease in the
eyes, to wear a bandage, to remain in darkness, I know not how long. I
was hardly six years old. I then heard the voice of Krates, the master,
who was skilful in medicine, and had himself treated me. 'Take her with
you this evening into the Basilica,' said he, 'it will not hurt her
eyes; and she must be there, so says the law.'"

"What sayest thou? For what purpose?" asked the two men in breathless
eagerness.

"I know not. You forget I was a child. But this stands yet clear before
me: In the evening father and mother took me between them, each holding
one of my hands; the master was also there; and they led me with
bandaged eyes--for the raw evening air of the late autumn might have
hurt them--into the Basilica. Here they took off the bandage and"----

"And now?"

"What didst thou see? What happened?"

"For the first time for months without pain, did my eyes again see the
bright but gentle light. Before the altar, which was lighted with many
wax candles, stood Johannes in shining white garments; the master
placed us all three at the lowest step of the altar, and then spoke a
number of words that I did not understand: the priest blessed us; my
parents wept--but I noticed it was from emotion, not from pain--and
kissed their master's knees; they then again put the bandage on my
eyes, and we went from the light of the church out into the darkness.
Since then light and Church and Johannes are to me one."

Felicitas could not quite understand what now happened to her.

Her husband warmly kissed her brow and eyes, and her uncle almost
crushed her hand.

"Go thou back to the house," cried at last her husband. "We must go
immediately to the church; thou art right--as always. Thou--thou hast
given to us the best, the saving counsel."

And he led her eagerly, with a last kiss, back into the garden.

"It is quite certain," said Crispus, when Fulvius again appeared, "that
it was not only by letter that they were set free; for greater safety
there was the ceremony in the church, before the priest, according to
all the forms of the law. And the child has all unsuspiciously revealed
it to us in our greatest need!"

"And the priest"----

"Was Johannes himself!"

"He yet lives. Thanks be to the holy ones! He can testify to it."

"And he shall: before this night! Before witnesses, before the Curies
shall he verify it! To the church!"

"To Johannes!"

And the two men hastened as fast as feet could carry them, down the
high-road to the town, towards the Porta Vindelica.

In the meanwhile Felicitas went slowly back to the house, often
stopping to look back at her husband until he had disappeared from
view.

"What may they be doing?" said she quietly, bending her beautiful head.
"Well, they are good: the holy ones are with them. The sun is now set
behind Vindelicia. But in the forest the sweet bird still sings his
evening song: how peaceful! how quiet! I will go to the bed of my
little one. I can wait there most calmly; Fulvius will come back before
night. For he loves us--yes, he loves us much, my little son!"

She then entered the house.




                               CHAPTER V.


But Fulvius did not come back that night.

When he and Crispus had passed through the Porta Vindelica, and had
turned into the Via Augustana, in which stood the church of Saint Peter
and the little house of the priest, they noticed Zeno, who was knocking
at the door of a magnificent building at the other end of the street.
It was the house of the Judge.

"He is using despatch," said Crispus. "It is well that we are already
here." And he touched the knocker, which in shape like a cross hung on
the small door of the priest's house.

"He will manage all through the Judge, who is his son-in-law," said
Fulvius, anxiously.

"And deeply indebted to the usurer. That holds everything together,
like sticky mud."

The door was opened, and a slave led them through a long, narrow
passage, dimly lighted by an oil lamp in a little niche in the wall, to
the room of the priest; drew back the curtain, and ushered in the two
guests.

The half-dark room was almost void of furniture: the lid of a large
chest served as a table, on it stood writing materials; on the walls
one saw a lamb, a fish, a dove, very roughly sketched and painted a red
colour.

Johannes, although in conversation with two priests, immediately turned
towards them; a meagre form, upright, in spite of his seventy years, by
the force of a strong, enthusiastic will; a gray Capuchin dress, tied
round the loins with a cord, was all his attire; a silver ring of white
hair, which shone like a nimbus, encircled his head. A long white beard
fell low on his breast.

"A moment's patience, dear friends," said he. "The business of my
brothers here is urgent; you see, they have the traveller's hat and
staff--but it will soon be concluded. Thou, Timotheus, wilt return
to-night to thy post. It is well that thou hast given the warning; but
only the hireling forsakes his flock, the good shepherd remains
constant to it."

"I go," said the one addressed, a young subdeacon, blushing quite
abashed: "I certainly did not wish to run away from the barbarians--I
only wished"----

"To give a warning, certainly. And then, perhaps, the spirit of
cowardice suggested this to thee--that Johannes would keep thee here
within the safe walls of this fortress. But I say to thee: 'Except the
Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.' And if the
troubles of war come over the poor people out there, thy consolations
will be needed. Go with God, my son, back to thy cell at Isunisca."

"Are the barbarians already so near?" cried Crispus, alarmed.

"Apparently; at least, brother Timotheus heard, three nights ago,
horsemen ride by his cell with unshod steeds. Those were not Romans."

"They were the night-riders, the gods of the heathen, led by Wotan, the
devil chief, whom our fathers named Teutates, but the Romans
Mercurius," said Bojorix, the deacon, an older man, and he trembled for
fear.

"Hardly," said Johannes, with a quiet smile, "for afterwards in clear
day, one of these night-phantoms, with a long flowing gray beard, and
clad in a wolf's skin, dashed into a company of armed merchants at the
bridge across the Inn, seized the largest wine-skin from the waggon,
threw it on his horse, and rode away. Spectres do not drink this year's
Räter wine. This news from the _west_ disturbs me less than the absence
of news from the _east_--from Ovilava and Lentia! There certainly came
from there, through the Porta Latina, a few peasants into the market;
but I did not know them: I was suspicious of them. Well, we stand in
the protection of the Lord, in the rising as in the setting of the sun!
But thou, Stephen"----

But he who was addressed heard not.