CHAPTER 1

On the east edge of the Land of Oz, in the Munchkin Country, is a big,
tall hill called Mount Munch. On one side, the bottom of this hill just
touches the Deadly Sandy Desert that separates the Fairyland of Oz from
all the rest of the world, but on the other side, the hill touches the
beautiful, fertile Country of the Munchkins.

The Munchkin folks, however, merely stand off and look at Mount Munch
and know very little about it; for, about a third of the way up, its
sides become too steep to climb, and if any people live upon the top of
that great towering peak that seems to reach nearly to the skies, the
Munchkins are not aware of the fact.

But people _do_ live there, just the same. The top of Mount Munch is
shaped like a saucer, broad and deep, and in the saucer are fields where
grains and vegetables grow, and flocks are fed, and brooks flow and
trees bear all sorts of things. There are houses scattered here and
there, each having its family of Hyups, as the people call themselves.
The Hyups seldom go down the mountain, for the same reason that the
Munchkins never climb up: the sides are too steep.

In one of the houses lived a wise old Hyup named Bini Aru, who used to
be a clever Sorcerer. But Ozma of Oz, who rules everyone in the Land of
Oz, had made a decree that no one should practice magic in her dominions
except Glinda the Good and the Wizard of Oz, and when Glinda sent this
royal command to the Hyups by means of a strong-winged Eagle, old Bini
Aru at once stopped performing magical arts. He destroyed many of his
magic powders and tools of magic, and afterward honestly obeyed the law.
He had never seen Ozma, but he knew she was his Ruler and must be
obeyed.

There was only one thing that grieved him. He had discovered a new and
secret method of transformations that was unknown to any other Sorcerer.
Glinda the Good did not know it, nor did the little Wizard of Oz, nor
Dr. Pipt nor old Mombi, nor anyone else who dealt in magic arts. It was
Bini Aru’s own secret. By its means, it was the simplest thing in the
world to transform anyone into beast, bird or fish, or anything else,
and back again, once you knew how to pronounce the mystical word:
“Pyrzqxgl.”

Bini Aru had used this secret many times, but not to cause evil or
suffering to others. When he had wandered far from home and was hungry,
he would say: “I want to become a cow—Pyrzqxgl!” In an instant he would
be a cow, and then he would eat grass and satisfy his hunger. All beasts
and birds can talk in the Land of Oz, so when the cow was no longer
hungry, it would say: “I want to be Bini Aru again: Pyrzqxgl!” and the
magic word, properly pronounced, would instantly restore him to his
proper form.

Now, of course, I would not dare to write down this magic word so
plainly if I thought my readers would pronounce it properly and so be
able to transform themselves and others, but it is a fact that no one in
all the world except Bini Aru, had ever (up to the time this story
begins) been able to pronounce “Pyrzqxgl” the right way, so I think it
is safe to give it to you. It might be well, however, in reading this
story aloud, to be careful not to pronounce Pyrzqxgl the proper way, and
thus avoid all danger of the secret being able to work mischief.

Bini Aru, having discovered the secret of instant transformation, which
required no tools or powders or other chemicals or herbs and always
worked perfectly, was reluctant to have such a wonderful discovery
entirely unknown or lost to all human knowledge. He decided not to use
it again, since Ozma had forbidden him to do so, but he reflected that
Ozma was a girl and some time might change her mind and allow her
subjects to practice magic, in which case Bini Aru could again transform
himself and others at will,—unless, of course, he forgot how to
pronounce Pyrzqxgl in the meantime.

After giving the matter careful thought, he decided to write the word,
and how it should be pronounced, in some secret place, so that he could
find it after many years, but where no one else could ever find it.

That was a clever idea, but what bothered the old Sorcerer was to find a
secret place. He wandered all over the Saucer at the top of Mount Munch,
but found no place in which to write the secret word where others might
not be likely to stumble upon it. So finally he decided it must be
written somewhere in his own house.

Bini Aru had a wife named Mopsi Aru who was famous for making fine
huckleberry pies, and he had a son named Kiki Aru who was not famous at
all. He was noted as being cross and disagreeable because he was not
happy, and he was not happy because he wanted to go down the mountain
and visit the big world below and his father would not let him. No one
paid any attention to Kiki Aru, because he didn’t amount to anything,
anyway.

Once a year there was a festival on Mount Munch which all the Hyups
attended. It was held in the center of the saucer-shaped country, and
the day was given over to feasting and merry-making. The young folks
danced and sang songs; the women spread the tables with good things to
eat, and the men played on musical instruments and told fairy tales.

Kiki Aru usually went to these festivals with his parents, and then sat
sullenly outside the circle and would not dance or sing or even talk to
the other young people. So the festival did not make him any happier
than other days, and this time he told Bini Aru and Mopsi Aru that he
would not go. He would rather stay at home and be unhappy all by
himself, he said, and so they gladly let him stay.

But after he was left alone Kiki decided to enter his father’s private
room, where he was forbidden to go, and see if he could find any of the
magic tools Bini Aru used to work with when he practiced sorcery. As he
went in Kiki stubbed his toe on one of the floor boards. He searched
everywhere but found no trace of his father’s magic. All had been
destroyed.

Much disappointed, he started to go out again when he stubbed his toe on
the same floor board. That set him thinking. Examining the board more
closely, Kiki found it had been pried up and then nailed down again in
such a manner that it was a little higher than the other boards. But why
had his father taken up the board? Had he hidden some of his magic tools
underneath the floor?

                             [Illustration]

Kiki got a chisel and pried up the board, but found nothing under it. He
was just about to replace the board when it slipped from his hand and
turned over, and he saw something written on the underside of it. The
light was rather dim, so he took the board to the window and examined
it, and found that the writing described exactly how to pronounce the
magic word Pyrzqxgl, which would transform anyone into anything
instantly, and back again when the word was repeated.

Now, at first, Kiki Aru didn’t realize what a wonderful secret he had
discovered; but he thought it might be of use to him and so he took a
piece of paper and made on it an exact copy of the instructions for
pronouncing Pyrzqxgl. Then he folded the paper and put it in his pocket,
and replaced the board in the floor so that no one would suspect it had
been removed.

After this Kiki went into the garden and sitting beneath a tree made a
careful study of the paper. He had always wanted to get away from Mount
Munch and visit the big world—especially the Land of Oz—and the idea now
came to him that if he could transform himself into a bird, he could fly
to any place he wished to go and fly back again whenever he cared to. It
was necessary, however, to learn by heart the way to pronounce the magic
word, because a bird would have no way to carry a paper with it, and
Kiki would be unable to resume his proper shape if he forgot the word or
its pronunciation.

So he studied it a long time, repeating it a hundred times in his mind
until he was sure he would not forget it. But to make safety doubly sure
he placed the paper in a tin box in a neglected part of the garden and
covered the box with small stones.

By this time it was getting late in the day and Kiki wished to attempt
his first transformation before his parents returned from the festival.
So he stood on the front porch of his home and said:

“I want to become a big, strong bird, like a hawk—Pyrzqxgl!” He
pronounced it the right way, so in a flash he felt that he was
completely changed in form. He flapped his wings, hopped to the porch
railing and said: “Caw-oo! Caw-oo!”

Then he laughed and said half aloud: “I suppose that’s the funny sound
this sort of a bird makes. But now let me try my wings and see if I’m
strong enough to fly across the desert.”

For he had decided to make his first trip to the country outside the
Land of Oz. He had stolen this secret of transformation and he knew he
had disobeyed the law of Oz by working magic. Perhaps Glinda or the
Wizard of Oz would discover him and punish him, so it would be good
policy to keep away from Oz altogether.

Slowly Kiki rose into the air, and resting on his broad wings, floated
in graceful circles above the saucer-shaped mountain-top. From his
height, he could see, far across the burning sands of the Deadly Desert,
another country that might be pleasant to explore, so he headed that
way, and with strong, steady strokes of his wings, began the long
flight.

                             [Illustration]




                                THE HAWK


                               CHAPTER 2

Even a hawk has to fly high in order to cross the Deadly Desert, from
which poisonous fumes are constantly rising. Kiki Aru felt sick and
faint by the time he reached good land again, for he could not quite
escape the effects of the poisons. But the fresh air soon restored him
and he alighted in a broad table-land which is called Hiland. Just
beyond it is a valley known as Loland, and these two countries are ruled
by the Gingerbread Man, John Dough, with Chick the Cherub as his Prime
Minister. The Hawk merely stopped here long enough to rest, and then he
flew north and passed over a fine country called Merryland, which is
ruled by a lovely Wax Doll. Then, following the curve of the Desert, he
turned north and settled on a tree-top in the Kingdom of Noland.

Kiki was tired by this time, and the sun was now setting, so he decided
to remain here till morning. From his tree-top he could see a house near
by, which looked very comfortable. A man was milking a cow in the yard
and a pleasant-faced woman came to the door and called him to supper.

That made Kiki wonder what sort of food hawks ate. He felt hungry, but
didn’t know what to eat or where to get it. Also he thought a bed would
be more comfortable than a tree-top for sleeping, so he hopped to the
ground and said: “I want to become Kiki Aru again—Pyrzqxgl!”

Instantly he had resumed his natural shape, and going to the house, he
knocked upon the door and asked for some supper.

“Who are you?” asked the man of the house.

“A stranger from the Land of Oz,” replied Kiki Aru.

“Then you are welcome,” said the man.

Kiki was given a good supper and a good bed, and he behaved very well,
although he refused to answer all the questions the good people of
Noland asked him. Having escaped from his home and found a way to see
the world, the young man was no longer unhappy, and so he was no longer
cross and disagreeable. The people thought him a very respectable person
and gave him breakfast next morning, after which he started on his way
feeling quite contented.

Having walked for an hour or two through the pretty country that is
ruled by King Bud, Kiki Aru decided he could travel faster and see more
as a bird, so he transformed himself into a white dove and visited the
great city of Nole and saw the King’s palace and gardens and many other
places of interest. Then he flew westward into the Kingdom of Ix, and
after a day in Queen Zixi’s country went on westward into the Land of
Ev. Every place he visited he thought was much more pleasant than the
saucer-country of the Hyups, and he decided that when he reached the
finest country of all he would settle there and enjoy his future life to
the utmost.

In the Land of Ev he resumed his own shape again, for the cities and
villages were close together and he could easily go on foot from one to
another of them.

Toward evening he came to a good Inn and asked the inn-keeper if he
could have food and lodging.

“You can if you have the money to pay,” said the man, “otherwise you
must go elsewhere.”

This surprised Kiki, for in the Land of Oz they do not use money at all,
everyone being allowed to take what he wishes without price. He had no
money, therefore, and so he turned away to seek hospitality elsewhere.
Looking through an open window into one of the rooms of the Inn, as he
passed along, he saw an old man counting on a table a big heap of gold
pieces, which Kiki thought to be money. One of these would buy him
supper and a bed, he reflected, so he transformed himself into a magpie
and, flying through the open window, caught up one of the gold pieces in
his beak and flew out again before the old man could interfere. Indeed,
the old man who was robbed was quite helpless, for he dared not leave
his pile of gold to chase the magpie, and before he could place the gold
in a sack and the sack in his pocket the robber bird was out of sight
and to seek it would be folly.

Kiki Aru flew to a group of trees and, dropping the gold piece to the
ground, resumed his proper shape, and then picked up the money and put
it in his pocket.

“You’ll be sorry for this!” exclaimed a small voice just over his head.

                             [Illustration]

Kiki looked up and saw that a sparrow, perched upon a branch, was
watching him.

“Sorry for what?” he demanded.

“Oh, I saw the whole thing,” asserted the sparrow. “I saw you look in
the window at the gold, and then make yourself into a magpie and rob the
poor man, and then I saw you fly here and make the bird into your former
shape. That’s magic, and magic is wicked and unlawful; and you stole
money, and that’s a still greater crime. You’ll be sorry, some day.”

                             [Illustration]

“I don’t care,” replied Kiki Aru, scowling.

“Aren’t you afraid to be wicked?” asked the sparrow.

“No, I didn’t know I was being wicked,” said Kiki, “but if I was, I’m
glad of it. I hate good people. I’ve always wanted to be wicked, but I
didn’t know how.”

“Haw, haw, haw!” laughed someone behind him, in a big voice; “that’s the
proper spirit, my lad! I’m glad I’ve met you; shake hands.”

The sparrow gave a frightened squeak and flew away.

                             [Illustration]




                              Two Bad Ones


                               CHAPTER 3

Kiki turned around and saw a queer old man standing near. He didn’t
stand straight, for he was crooked. He had a fat body and thin legs and
arms. He had a big, round face with bushy, white whiskers that came to a
point below his waist, and white hair that came to a point on top of his
head. He wore dull-gray clothes that were tight fitting, and his pockets
were all bunched out as if stuffed full of something.

“I didn’t know you were here,” said Kiki.

“I didn’t come until after you did,” said the queer old man.

“Who are you?” asked Kiki.

“My name’s Ruggedo. I used to be the Nome King; but I got kicked out of
my country, and now I’m a wanderer.”

“What made them kick you out?” inquired the Hyup boy.

“Well, it’s the fashion to kick kings nowadays. I was a pretty good
King—to myself—but those dreadful Oz people wouldn’t let me alone. So I
had to abdicate.”

“What does that mean?”

“It means to be kicked out. But let’s talk about something pleasant. Who
are you and where did you come from?”

“I’m called Kiki Aru. I used to live on Mount Munch in the Land of Oz,
but now I’m a wanderer like yourself.”

The Nome King gave him a shrewd look.

“I heard that bird say that you transformed yourself into a magpie and
back again. Is that true?”

Kiki hesitated, but saw no reason to deny it. He felt that it would make
him appear more important.

“Well—yes,” he said.

“Then you’re a wizard?”

“No; I only understand transformations,” he admitted.

“Well, that’s pretty good magic, anyhow,” declared old Ruggedo. “I used
to have some very fine magic, myself, but my enemies took it all away
from me. Where are you going now?”

“I’m going into the inn, to get some supper and a bed,” said Kiki.

“Have you the money to pay for it?” asked the Nome.

“I have one gold piece.”

“Which you stole. Very good. And you’re glad that you’re wicked. Better
yet. I like you, young man, and I’ll go to the inn with you if you’ll
promise not to eat eggs for supper.”

“Don’t you like eggs?” asked Kiki.

“I’m afraid of ’em; they’re dangerous!” said Ruggedo, with a shudder.

“All right,” agreed Kiki; “I won’t ask for eggs.”

“Then come along,” said the Nome.

When they entered the inn, the landlord scowled at Kiki and said:

“I told you I would not feed you unless you had money.”

Kiki showed him the gold piece.

“And how about you?” asked the landlord, turning to Ruggedo. “Have you
money?”

“I’ve something better,” answered the old Nome, and taking a bag from
one of his pockets he poured from it upon the table a mass of glittering
gems—diamonds, rubies and emeralds.

The landlord was very polite to the strangers after that. He served them
an excellent supper, and while they ate it, the Hyup boy asked his
companion:

“Where did you get so many jewels?”

“Well, I’ll tell you,” answered the Nome. “When those Oz people took my
kingdom away from me—just because it was my kingdom and I wanted to run
it to suit myself—they said I could take as many precious stones as I
could carry. So I had a lot of pockets made in my clothes and loaded
them all up. Jewels are fine things to have with you when you travel;
you can trade them for anything.”

“Are they better than gold pieces?” asked Kiki.

“The smallest of these jewels is worth a hundred gold pieces such as you
stole from the old man.”

“Don’t talk so loud,” begged Kiki, uneasily. “Some one else might hear
what you are saying.”

After supper they took a walk together, and the former Nome King said:

“Do you know the Shaggy Man, and the Scarecrow, and the Tin Woodman, and
Dorothy, and Ozma and all the other Oz people?”

“No,” replied the boy, “I have never been away from Mount Munch until I
flew over the Deadly Desert the other day in the shape of a hawk.”

“Then you’ve never seen the Emerald City of Oz?”

“Never.”

“Well,” said the Nome, “I knew all the Oz people, and you can guess I do
not love them. All during my wanderings I have brooded on how I can be
revenged on them. Now that I’ve met you I can see a way to conquer the
Land of Oz and be King there myself, which is better than being King of
the Nomes.”

“How can you do that?” inquired Kiki Aru, wonderingly.

“Never mind how. In the first place, I’ll make a bargain with you. Tell
me the secret of how to perform transformations and I will give you a
pocketful of jewels, the biggest and finest that I possess.”

“No,” said Kiki, who realized that to share his power with another would
be dangerous to himself.

“I’ll give you _two_ pocketsful of jewels,” said the Nome.

“No;” answered Kiki.

“I’ll give you every jewel I possess.”

“No, no, no!” said Kiki, who was beginning to be frightened.

“Then,” said the Nome, with a wicked look at the boy, “I’ll tell the
inn-keeper that you stole that gold piece and he will have you put in
prison.”

Kiki laughed at the threat.

“Before he can do that,” said he, “I will transform myself into a lion
and tear him to pieces, or into a bear and eat him up, or into a fly and
fly away where he could not find me.”

“Can you really do such wonderful transformations?” asked the old Nome,
looking at him curiously.

“Of course,” declared Kiki. “I can transform you into a stick of wood,
in a flash, or into a stone, and leave you here by the roadside.”

The wicked Nome shivered a little when he heard that, but it made him
long more than ever to possess the great secret. After a while he said:

“I’ll tell you what I’ll do. If you will help me to conquer Oz and to
transform the Oz people, who are my enemies, into sticks or stones, by
telling me your secret, I’ll agree to make _you_ the Ruler of all Oz,
and I will be your Prime Minister and see that your orders are obeyed.”

“I’ll help do that,” said Kiki, “but I won’t tell you my secret.”

The Nome was so furious at this refusal that he jumped up and down with
rage and spluttered and choked for a long time before he could control
his passion. But the boy was not at all frightened. He laughed at the
wicked old Nome, which made him more furious than ever.

“Let’s give up the idea,” he proposed, when Ruggedo had quieted
somewhat. “I don’t know the Oz people you mention and so they are not my
enemies. If they’ve kicked you out of your kingdom, that’s your
affair—not mine.”

“Wouldn’t you like to be king of that splendid fairyland?” asked
Ruggedo.

“Yes, I would,” replied Kiki Aru; “but you want to be king yourself, and
we would quarrel over it.”

“No,” said the Nome, trying to deceive him. “I don’t care to be king of
Oz, come to think it over. I don’t even care to live in that country.
What I want first is revenge. If we can conquer Oz, I’ll get enough
magic then to conquer my own kingdom of the Nomes, and I’ll go back and
live in my underground caverns, which are more home-like than the top of
the earth. So here’s my proposition: Help me conquer Oz and get revenge,
and help me get the magic away from Glinda and the Wizard, and I’ll let
you be King of Oz forever afterward.”

                             [Illustration]

“I’ll think it over,” answered Kiki, and that is all he would say that
evening.

In the night when all in the Inn were asleep but himself, old Ruggedo
the Nome, rose softly from his couch and went into the room of Kiki Aru
the Hyup, and searched everywhere for the magic tool that performed his
transformations. Of course, there was no such tool, and although Ruggedo
searched in all the boy’s pockets, he found nothing magical whatever. So
he went back to his bed and began to doubt that Kiki could perform
transformations.

Next morning he said:

“Which way do you travel to-day?”

“I think I shall visit the Rose Kingdom,” answered the boy.

“That is a long journey,” declared the Nome.

“I shall transform myself into a bird,” said Kiki, “and so fly to the
Rose Kingdom in an hour.”

“Then transform me, also, into a bird, and I will go with you,”
suggested Ruggedo. “But, in that case, let us fly together to the Land
of Oz, and see what it looks like.”

Kiki thought this over. Pleasant as were the countries he had visited,
he heard everywhere that the Land of Oz was more beautiful and
delightful. The Land of Oz was his own country, too, and if there was
any possibility of his becoming its King, he must know something about
it.

While Kiki the Hyup thought, Ruggedo the Nome was also thinking. This
boy possessed a marvelous power, and although very simple in some ways,
he was determined not to part with his secret. However, if Ruggedo could
get him to transport the wily old Nome to Oz, which he could reach in no
other way, he might then induce the boy to follow his advice and enter
into the plot for revenge, which he had already planned in his wicked
heart.

“There are wizards and magicians in Oz,” remarked Kiki, after a time.
“They might discover us, in spite of our transformations.”

“Not if we are careful,” Ruggedo assured him. “Ozma has a Magic Picture,
in which she can see whatever she wishes to see; but Ozma will know
nothing of our going to Oz, and so she will not command her Magic
Picture to show where we are or what we are doing. Glinda the Good has a
Great Book called the Book of Records, in which is magically written
everything that people do in the Land of Oz, just the instant they do
it.”

“Then,” said Kiki, “there is no use our attempting to conquer the
country, for Glinda would read in her book all that we do, and as her
magic is greater than mine, she would soon put a stop to our plans.”

“I said ‘people,’ didn’t I?” retorted the Nome. “The book doesn’t make a
record of what birds do, or beasts. It only tells the doings of people.
So, if we fly into the country as birds, Glinda won’t know anything
about it.”

                             [Illustration]

“Two birds couldn’t conquer the Land of Oz,” asserted the boy,
scornfully.

“No; that’s true,” admitted Ruggedo, and then he rubbed his forehead and
stroked his long pointed beard and thought some more.

“Ah, now I have the idea!” he declared. “I suppose you can transform us
into beasts as well as birds?”

“Of course.”

“And can you make a bird a beast, and a beast a bird again, without
taking a human form in between?”

“Certainly,” said Kiki. “I can transform myself or others into anything
that can talk. There’s a magic word that must be spoken in connection
with the transformations, and as beasts and birds and dragons and fishes
can talk in Oz, we may become any of these we desire to. However, if I
transformed myself into a tree, I would always remain a tree, because
then I could not utter the magic word to change the transformation.”

“I see; I see,” said Ruggedo, nodding his bushy, white head until the
point of his hair waved back and forth like a pendulum. “That fits in
with my idea, exactly. Now, listen, and I’ll explain to you my plan.
We’ll fly to Oz as birds and settle in one of the thick forests in the
Gillikin Country. There you will transform us into powerful beasts, and
as Glinda doesn’t keep any track of the doings of beasts we can act
without being discovered.”

“But how can two beasts raise an army to conquer the powerful people of
Oz?” inquired Kiki.

“That’s easy. But not an army of _people_, mind you. That would be
quickly discovered. And while we are in Oz you and I will never resume
our human forms until we’ve conquered the country and destroyed Glinda,
and Ozma, and the Wizard, and Dorothy, and all the rest, and so have
nothing more to fear from them.”

“It is impossible to kill anyone in the Land of Oz,” declared Kiki.

“It isn’t necessary to kill the Oz people,” rejoined Ruggedo.

“I’m afraid I don’t understand you,” objected the boy. “What will happen
to the Oz people, and what sort of an army could we get together, except
of people?”

“I’ll tell you. The forests of Oz are full of beasts. Some of them, in
the far-away places, are savage and cruel, and would gladly follow a
leader as savage as themselves. They have never troubled the Oz people
much, because they had no leader to urge them on, but we will tell them
to help us conquer Oz and as a reward we will transform all the beasts
into men and women, and let them live in the houses and enjoy all the
good things; and we will transform all the people of Oz into beasts of
various sorts, and send them to live in the forests and the jungles.
That is a splendid idea, you must admit, and it’s so easy that we won’t
have any trouble at all to carry it through to success.”

“Will the beasts consent, do you think?” asked the boy.

“To be sure they will. We can get every beast in Oz on our side—except a
few who live in Ozma’s palace, and they won’t count.”

                             [Illustration]




                              Conspirators


                               CHAPTER 4

Kiki Aru didn’t know much about Oz and didn’t know much about the beasts
who lived there, but the old Nome’s plan seemed to him to be quite
reasonable. He had a faint suspicion that Ruggedo meant to get the best
of him in some way, and he resolved to keep a close watch on his
fellow-conspirator. As long as he kept to himself the secret word of the
transformations, Ruggedo would not dare to harm him, and he promised
himself that as soon as they had conquered Oz, he would transform the
old Nome into a marble statue and keep him in that form forever.

Ruggedo, on his part, decided that he could, by careful watching and
listening, surprise the boy’s secret, and when he had learned the magic
word he would transform Kiki Aru into a bundle of faggots and burn him
up and so be rid of him.

This is always the way with wicked people. They cannot be trusted even
by one another. Ruggedo thought he was fooling Kiki, and Kiki thought he
was fooling Ruggedo; so both were pleased.

“It’s a long way across the Desert,” remarked the boy, “and the sands
are hot and send up poisonous vapors. Let us wait until evening and then
fly across in the night when it will be cooler.”

The former Nome King agreed to this, and the two spent the rest of that
day in talking over their plans. When evening came they paid the
inn-keeper and walked out to a little grove of trees that stood near by.

“Remain here for a few minutes and I’ll soon be back,” said Kiki, and
walking swiftly away, he left the Nome standing in the grove. Ruggedo
wondered where he had gone, but stood quietly in his place until, all of
a sudden, his form changed to that of a great eagle, and he uttered a
piercing cry of astonishment and flapped his wings in a sort of panic.
At once his eagle cry was answered from beyond the grove, and another
eagle, even larger and more powerful than the transformed Ruggedo, came
sailing through the trees and alighted beside him.

“Now we are ready for the start,” said the voice of Kiki, coming from
the eagle.

Ruggedo realized that this time he had been outwitted. He had thought
Kiki would utter the magic word in his presence, and so he would learn
what it was, but the boy had been too shrewd for that.

As the two eagles mounted high into the air and began their flight
across the great Desert that separates the Land of Oz from all the rest
of the world, the Nome said:

“When I was king of the Nomes I had a magic way of working
transformations that I thought was good, but it could not compare with
your secret word. I had to have certain tools and make passes and say a
lot of mystic words before I could transform anybody.”

“What became of your magic tools?” inquired Kiki.

                             [Illustration]

“The Oz people took them all away from me—that horrid girl, Dorothy, and
that terrible fairy, Ozma, the Ruler of Oz—at the time they took away my
underground kingdom and kicked me upstairs into the cold, heartless
world.”

“Why did you let them do that?” asked the boy.

                             [Illustration]

“Well,” said Ruggedo, “I couldn’t help it. They rolled eggs at
me—_eggs_—dreadful eggs!—and if an egg even touches a Nome, he is ruined
for life.”

“Is any kind of an egg dangerous to a Nome?”

“Any kind and every kind. An egg is the only thing I’m afraid of.”




                          A Happy Corner of Oz


                               CHAPTER 5

There is no other country so beautiful as the Land of Oz. There are no
other people so happy and contented and prosperous as the Oz people.
They have all they desire; they love and admire their beautiful girl
Ruler, Ozma of Oz, and they mix work and play so justly that both are
delightful and satisfying and no one has any reason to complain. Once in
a while something happens in Oz to disturb the people’s happiness for a
brief time, for so rich and attractive a fairyland is sure to make a few
selfish and greedy outsiders envious, and therefore certain evil-doers
have treacherously plotted to conquer Oz and enslave its people and
destroy its girl Ruler, and so gain the wealth of Oz for themselves. But
up to the time when the cruel and crafty Nome, Ruggedo, conspired with
Kiki Aru, the Hyup, all such attempts had failed. The Oz people
suspected no danger. Life in the world’s nicest fairyland was one round
of joyous, happy days.

In the center of the Emerald City of Oz, the capital city of Ozma’s
dominions, is a vast and beautiful garden, surrounded by a wall inlaid
with shining emeralds, and in the center of this garden stands Ozma’s
Royal Palace, the most splendid building ever constructed. From a
hundred towers and domes floated the banners of Oz, which included the
Ozmies, the Munchkins, the Gillikins, the Winkies and the Quadlings. The
banner of the Munchkins is blue, that of the Winkies yellow; the
Gillikin banner is purple, and the Quadling’s banner is red. The colors
of the Emerald City are of course green. Ozma’s own banner has a green
center, and is divided into four quarters. These quarters are colored
blue, purple, yellow and red, indicating that she rules over all the
countries of the Land of Oz.

This fairyland is so big, however, that all of it is not yet known to
its girl Ruler, and it is said that in some far parts of the country, in
forests and mountain fastnesses, in hidden valleys and thick jungles,
are people and beasts that know as little about Ozma as she knows of
them. Still, these unknown subjects are not nearly so numerous as the
known inhabitants of Oz, who occupy all the countries near to the
Emerald City. Indeed, I’m sure it will not be long until all parts of
the fairyland of Oz are explored and their peoples made acquainted with
their Ruler, for in Ozma’s palace are several of her friends who are so
curious that they are constantly discovering new and extraordinary
places and inhabitants.

One of the most frequent discoverers of these hidden places in Oz is a
little Kansas girl named Dorothy, who is Ozma’s dearest friend and lives
in luxurious rooms in the Royal Palace. Dorothy is, indeed, a Princess
of Oz, but she does not like to be called a princess, and because she is
simple and sweet and does not pretend to be anything but an ordinary
little girl, she is called just “Dorothy” by everybody and is the most
popular person, next to Ozma, in all the Land of Oz.

                             [Illustration]

One morning Dorothy crossed the hall of the palace and knocked on the
door of another girl named Trot, also a guest and friend of Ozma. When
told to enter, Dorothy found that Trot had company, an old sailor-man
with one wooden leg and one meat leg, who was sitting by the open window
puffing smoke from a corn-cob pipe. This sailor-man was named Cap’n
Bill, and he had accompanied Trot to the Land of Oz and was her oldest
and most faithful comrade and friend. Dorothy liked Cap’n Bill, too, and
after she had greeted him, she said to Trot:

“You know, Ozma’s birthday is next month, and I’ve been wondering what I
can give her as a birthday present. She’s so good to us all that we
certainly ought to remember her birthday.”

“That’s true,” agreed Trot. “I’ve been wondering, too, what I could give
Ozma. It’s pretty hard to decide, ’cause she’s got already all she
wants, and as she’s a fairy and knows a lot about magic, she could
satisfy any wish.”

“I know,” returned Dorothy, “but that isn’t the point. It isn’t that
Ozma _needs_ anything, but that it will please her to know we’ve
remembered her birthday. But what shall we give her?”

Trot shook her head in despair.

“I’ve tried to think and I can’t,” she declared.

“It’s the same way with me,” said Dorothy.

“I know one thing that ’ud please her,” remarked Cap’n Bill, turning his
round face with its fringe of whiskers toward the two girls and staring
at them with his big, light-blue eyes wide open.

“What is it, Cap’n Bill?”

“It’s an Enchanted Flower,” said he. “It’s a pretty plant that stands in
a golden flower-pot an’ grows all sorts o’ flowers, one after another.
One minute a fine rose buds an’ blooms, an’ then a tulip, an’ next a
chrys—chrys—”

“—anthemum,” said Dorothy, helping him.

“That’s it; and next a dahlia, an’ then a daffydil, an’ on all through
the range o’ posies. Jus’ as soon as one fades away, another comes, of a
different sort, an’ the perfume from ’em is mighty snifty, an’ they
keeps bloomin’ night and day, year in an’ year out.”

“That’s wonderful!” exclaimed Dorothy. “I think Ozma would like it.”

“But where is the Magic Flower, and how can we get it?” asked Trot.

“Dun’no, zac’ly,” slowly replied Cap’n Bill. “The Glass Cat tol’ me
about it only yesterday, an’ said it was in some lonely place up at the
nor’east o’ here. The Glass Cat goes travelin’ all around Oz, you know,
an’ the little critter sees a lot o’ things no one else does.”

“That’s true,” said Dorothy, thoughtfully. “Northeast of here must be in
the Munchkin Country, and perhaps a good way off, so let’s ask the Glass
Cat to tell us how to get to the Magic Flower.”

So the two girls, with Cap’n Bill stumping along on his wooden leg after
them, went out into the garden, and after some time spent in searching,
they found the Glass Cat curled up in the sunshine beside a bush, fast
asleep.

                             [Illustration]

The Glass Cat is one of the most curious creatures in all Oz. It was
made by a famous magician named Dr. Pipt before Ozma had forbidden her
subjects to work magic. Dr. Pipt had made the Glass Cat to catch mice,
but the Cat refused to catch mice and was considered more curious than
useful.

This astonishing cat was made all of glass and was so clear and
transparent that you could see through it as easily as through a window.
In the top of its head, however, was a mass of delicate pink balls which
looked like jewels but were intended for brains. It had a heart made of
a blood-red ruby. The eyes were two large emeralds. But, aside from
these colors, all the rest of the animal was of clear glass, and it had
a spun-glass tail that was really beautiful.

“Here, wake up,” said Cap’n Bill. “We want to talk to you.”

Slowly the Glass Cat got upon its feet, yawned and then looked at the
three who stood before it.

“How dare you disturb me?” it asked in a peevish voice. “You ought to be
ashamed of yourselves.”

“Never mind that,” returned the Sailor. “Do you remember tellin’ me
yesterday ’bout a Magic Flower in a Gold Pot?”

“Do you think I’m a fool? Look at my brains—you can see ’em work. Of
course I remember!” said the cat.

“Well, where can we find it?”

“You can’t. It’s none of your business, anyhow. Go away and let me
sleep,” advised the Glass Cat.

“Now, see here,” said Dorothy; “we want the Magic Flower to give to Ozma
on her birthday. You’d be glad to please Ozma, wouldn’t you?”

“I’m not sure,” replied the creature. “Why should I want to please
anybody?”

                             [Illustration]

“You’ve got a heart, ’cause I can see it inside of you,” said Trot.

“Yes; it’s a pretty heart, and I’m fond of it,” said the cat, twisting
around to view its own body. “But it’s made from a ruby, and it’s hard
as nails.”

“Aren’t you good for _any_thing?” asked Trot.

“Yes, I’m pretty to look at, and that’s more than can be said of you,”
retorted the creature.

Trot laughed at this, and Dorothy, who understood the Glass Cat pretty
well, said soothingly:

“You are indeed beautiful, and if you can tell Cap’n Bill where to find
the Magic Flower, all the people in Oz will praise your cleverness. The
Flower will belong to Ozma, but everyone will know the Glass Cat
discovered it.”

This was the kind of praise the crystal creature liked.

“Well,” it said, while the pink brains rolled around, “I found the Magic
Flower way up in the north of the Munchkin Country where few people live
or ever go. There’s a river there that flows through a forest, and in
the middle of the river in the middle of the forest there is a small
island on which stands the gold pot in which grows the Magic Flower.”

“How did you get to the island?” asked Dorothy. “Glass cats can’t swim.”

“No, but I’m not afraid of water,” was the reply. “I just walked across
the river on the bottom.”

“Under the water?” exclaimed Trot.

The cat gave her a scornful look.

“How could I walk _over_ the water on the _bottom_ of the river? If you
were transparent, anyone could see _your_ brains were not working. But
I’m sure you could never find the place alone. It has always been hidden
from the Oz people.”

                             [Illustration]

“But you, with your fine pink brains, could find it again, I s’pose,”
remarked Dorothy.

“Yes; and if you want that Magic Flower for Ozma, I’ll go with you and
show you the way.”

“That’s lovely of you!” declared Dorothy. “Trot and Cap’n Bill will go
with you, for this is to be their birthday present to Ozma. While you’re
gone I’ll have to find something else to give her.”

“All right. Come on, then, Cap’n,” said the Glass Cat, starting to move
away.

“Wait a minute,” begged Trot. “How long will we be gone?”

“Oh, about a week.”

“Then I’ll put some things in a basket to take with us,” said the girl,
and ran into the palace to make her preparations for the journey.

                             [Illustration]




                        Ozma’s Birthday Presents


                               CHAPTER 6

When Cap’n Bill and Trot and the Glass Cat had started for the hidden
island in the far-off river to get the Magic Flower, Dorothy wondered
again what she could give Ozma on her birthday. She met the Patchwork
Girl and said:

“What are you going to give Ozma for a birthday present?”

“I’ve written a song for her,” answered the strange Patchwork Girl, who
went by the name of “Scraps,” and who, though stuffed with cotton, had a
fair assortment of mixed brains. “It’s a splendid song and the chorus
runs this way:

        “I am crazy;
        You’re a daisy,
          Ozma dear;
        I’m demented;
        You’re contented,
          Ozma dear;
  I am patched and gay and glary;
  You’re a sweet and lovely fairy;
  May your birthdays all be happy,
          Ozma dear!”

“How do you like it, Dorothy?” inquired the Patchwork Girl.

“Is it good poetry, Scraps?” asked Dorothy, doubtfully.

“It’s as good as any ordinary song,” was the reply. “I have given it a
dandy title, too. I shall call the song: ‘When Ozma Has a Birthday,
Everybody’s Sure to Be Gay, for She Cannot Help the Fact That She Was
Born.’”

“That’s a pretty long title, Scraps,” said Dorothy.

“That makes it stylish,” replied the Patchwork Girl, turning a
somersault and alighting on one stuffed foot. “Now-a-days the titles are
sometimes longer than the songs.”

                             [Illustration]

Dorothy left her and walked slowly toward the palace, where she met the
Tin Woodman just going up the front steps.

“What are you going to give Ozma on her birthday?” she asked.

“It’s a secret, but I’ll tell you,” replied the Tin Woodman, who was
Emperor of the Winkies. “I am having my people make Ozma a lovely girdle
set with beautiful tin nuggets. Each tin nugget will be surrounded by a
circle of emeralds, just to set it off to good advantage. The clasp of
the girdle will be pure tin! Won’t that be fine?”

“I’m sure she’ll like it,” said Dorothy. “Do you know what _I_ can give
her?”

“I haven’t the slightest idea, Dorothy. It took me three months to think
of my own present for Ozma.”

The girl walked thoughtfully around to the back of the palace, and
presently came upon the famous Scarecrow of Oz, who was having two of
the palace servants stuff his legs with fresh straw.

“What are you going to give Ozma on her birthday?” asked Dorothy.

“I want to surprise her,” answered the Scarecrow.

“I won’t tell,” promised Dorothy.

“Well, I’m having some straw slippers made for her—all straw, mind you,
and braided very artistically. Ozma has always admired my straw filling,
so I’m sure she’ll be pleased with these lovely straw slippers.”

“Ozma will be pleased with anything her loving friends give her,” said
the girl. “What _I’m_ worried about, Scarecrow, is what to give Ozma
that she hasn’t got already.”

“That’s what worried me, until I thought of the slippers,” said the
Scarecrow. “You’ll have to _think_, Dorothy; that’s the only way to get
a good idea. If I hadn’t such wonderful brains, I’d never have thought
of those straw foot-decorations.”

                             [Illustration]

Dorothy left him and went to her room, where she sat down and tried to
think hard. A Pink Kitten was curled up on the window-sill and Dorothy
asked her:

“What can I give Ozma for her birthday present?”

“Oh, give her some milk,” replied the Pink Kitten; “that’s the nicest
thing I know of.”

A fuzzy little black dog had squatted down at Dorothy’s feet and now
looked up at her with intelligent eyes.

“Tell me, Toto,” said the girl; “what would Ozma like best for a
birthday present?”

The little black dog wagged his tail.

“Your love,” said he. “Ozma wants to be loved more than anything else.”

“But I already love her, Toto!”

“Then tell her you love her twice as much as you ever did before.”

“That wouldn’t be true,” objected Dorothy, “for I’ve always loved her as
much as I could, and, really, Toto, I want to give Ozma some _present_,
’cause everyone else will give her a present.”

“Let me see,” said Toto. “How would it be to give her that useless Pink
Kitten?”

“No, Toto; that wouldn’t do.”

“Then six kisses.”

“No; that’s no present.”

“Well, I guess you’ll have to figure it out for yourself, Dorothy,” said
the little dog. “To _my_ notion you’re more particular than Ozma will
be.”

Dorothy decided that if anyone could help her it would be Glinda the
Good, the wonderful Sorceress of Oz who was Ozma’s faithful subject and
friend. But Glinda’s castle was in the Quadling Country and quite a
journey from the Emerald City.

                             [Illustration]

So the little girl went to Ozma and asked permission to use the Wooden
Sawhorse and the royal Red Wagon to pay a visit to Glinda, and the girl
Ruler kissed Princess Dorothy and graciously granted permission.

The Wooden Sawhorse was one of the most remarkable creatures in Oz. Its
body was a small log and its legs were limbs of trees stuck in the body.
Its eyes were knots, its mouth was sawed in the end of the log and its
ears were two chips. A small branch had been left at the rear end of the
log to serve as a tail.

Ozma herself, during one of her early adventures, had brought this
wooden horse to life, and so she was much attached to the queer animal
and had shod the bottoms of its wooden legs with plates of gold so they
would not wear out. The sawhorse was a swift and willing traveler, and
though it could talk if need arose, it seldom said anything unless
spoken to. When the Sawhorse was harnessed to the Red Wagon there were
no reins to guide him because all that was needed was to tell him where
to go.

Dorothy now told him to go to Glinda’s Castle and the Sawhorse carried
her there with marvelous speed.

“Glinda,” said Dorothy, when she had been greeted by the Sorceress, who
was tall and stately, with handsome and dignified features and dressed
in a splendid and becoming gown, “what are you going to give Ozma for a
birthday present?”

The Sorceress smiled and answered:

“Come into my patio and I will show you.”

                             [Illustration]

So they entered a place that was surrounded by the wings of the great
castle but had no roof, and was filled with flowers and fountains and
exquisite statuary and many settees and chairs of polished marble or
filigree gold. Here there were gathered fifty beautiful young girls,
Glinda’s handmaids, who had been selected from all parts of the Land of
Oz on account of their wit and beauty and sweet dispositions. It was a
great honor to be made one of Glinda’s handmaidens.

When Dorothy followed the Sorceress into this delightful patio all the
fifty girls were busily weaving, and their shuttles were filled with a
sparkling green spun glass such as the little girl had never seen
before.

“What is it, Glinda?” she asked.

“One of my recent discoveries,” explained the Sorceress. “I have found a
way to make threads from emeralds, by softening the stones and then
spinning them into long, silken strands. With these emerald threads we
are weaving cloth to make Ozma a splendid court gown for her birthday.
You will notice that the threads have all the beautiful glitter and
luster of the emeralds from which they are made, and so Ozma’s new dress
will be the most magnificent the world has ever seen, and quite fitting
for our lovely Ruler of the Fairyland of Oz.”

Dorothy’s eyes were fairly dazed by the brilliance of the emerald cloth,
some of which the girls had already woven.

“I’ve never seen _any_thing so beautiful!” she said, with a sigh. “But
tell me, Glinda, what can _I_ give our lovely Ozma on her birthday?”

The good Sorceress considered this question for a long time before she
replied. Finally she said:

“Of course there will be a grand feast at the Royal Palace on Ozma’s
birthday, and all our friends will be present. So I suggest that you
make a fine big birthday cake for Ozma, and surround it with candles.”

“Oh, just a _cake_!” exclaimed Dorothy, in disappointment.

“Nothing is nicer for a birthday,” said the Sorceress.

“How many candles should there be on the cake?” asked the girl.

“Just a row of them,” replied Glinda, “for no one knows how old Ozma is,
although she appears to us to be just a young girl—as fresh and fair as
if she had lived but a few years.”

“A cake doesn’t seem like much of a present,” Dorothy asserted.

“Make it a surprise cake,” suggested the Sorceress. “Don’t you remember
the four and twenty blackbirds that were baked in a pie? Well, you need
not use live blackbirds in your cake, but you could have some surprise
of a different sort.”

“Like what?” questioned Dorothy, eagerly.

“If I told you, it wouldn’t be _your_ present to Ozma, but _mine_,”
answered the Sorceress, with a smile. “Think it over, my dear, and I am
sure you can originate a surprise that will add greatly to the joy and
merriment of Ozma’s birthday banquet.”

Dorothy thanked her friend and entered the Red Wagon and told the
Sawhorse to take her back home to the palace in the Emerald City.

On the way she thought the matter over seriously of making a surprise
birthday cake and finally decided what to do.

As soon as she reached home, she went to the Wizard of Oz, who had a
room fitted up in one of the high towers of the palace, where he studied
magic so as to be able to perform such wizardry as Ozma commanded him to
do for the welfare of her subjects.

The Wizard and Dorothy were firm friends and had enjoyed many strange
adventures together. He was a little man with a bald head and sharp eyes
and a round, jolly face, and because he was neither haughty nor proud he
had become a great favorite with the Oz people.

“Wizard,” said Dorothy, “I want you to help me fix up a present for
Ozma’s birthday.”

“I’ll be glad to do anything for you and for Ozma,” he answered. “What’s
on your mind, Dorothy?”

“I’m going to make a great cake, with frosting and candles, and all
that, you know.”

“Very good,” said the Wizard.

“In the center of this cake I’m going to leave a hollow place, with just
a roof of the frosting over it,” continued the girl.

                             [Illustration]

“Very good,” repeated the Wizard, nodding his bald head.

“In that hollow place,” said Dorothy, “I want to hide a lot of monkeys
about three inches high, and after the cake is placed on the banquet
table, I want the monkeys to break through the frosting and dance around
on the table-cloth. Then, I want each monkey to cut out a piece of cake
and hand it to a guest.”

“Mercy me!” cried the little Wizard, as he chuckled with laughter. “Is
that _all_ you want, Dorothy?”

“Almost,” said she. “Can you think of anything more the little monkeys
can do, Wizard?”

“Not just now,” he replied. “But where will you get such tiny monkeys?”

“That’s where you’re to help me,” said Dorothy. “In some of those wild
forests in the Gillikin Country are lots of monkeys.”

“Big ones,” said the Wizard.

“Well, you and I will go there, and we’ll get some of the big monkeys,
and you will make them small—just three inches high—by means of your
magic, and we’ll put the little monkeys all in a basket and bring them
home with us. Then you’ll train them to dance—up here in your room,
where no one can see them—and on Ozma’s birthday we’ll put ’em into the
cake and they’ll know by that time just what to do.”

The Wizard looked at Dorothy with admiring approval, and chuckled again.

“That’s really clever, my dear,” he said, “and I see no reason why we
can’t do it, just the way you say, if only we can get the wild monkeys
to agree to it.”

“Do you think they’ll object?” asked the girl.

“Yes; but perhaps we can argue them into it. Anyhow, it’s worth trying,
and I’ll help you if you’ll agree to let this Surprise Cake be a present
to Ozma from you and me together. I’ve been wondering what _I_ could
give Ozma, and as I’ve got to train the monkeys as well as make them
small, I think you ought to make me your partner.”

“Of course,” said Dorothy; “I’ll be glad to do so.”

“Then, it’s a bargain,” declared the Wizard. “We must go to seek those
monkeys at once, however, for it will take time to train them and we’ll
have to travel a good way to the Gillikin forests where they live.”

“I’m ready to go any time,” agreed Dorothy. “Shall we ask Ozma to let us
take the Sawhorse?”

The Wizard did not answer that at once. He took time to think of the
suggestion.

“No,” he answered at length, “the Red Wagon couldn’t get through the
thick forests and there’s some danger to us in going into the wild
places to search for monkeys. So I propose we take the Cowardly Lion and
the Hungry Tiger. We can ride on their backs as well as in the Red
Wagon, and if there is danger to us from other beasts, these two
friendly champions will protect us from all harm.”

“That’s a splendid idea!” exclaimed Dorothy. “Let’s go now and ask the
Hungry Tiger and the Cowardly Lion if they will help us. Shall we ask
Ozma if we can go?”

“I think not,” said the Wizard, getting his hat and his black bag of
magic tools. “This is to be a surprise for her birthday, and so she
mustn’t know where we’re going. We’ll just leave word, in case Ozma
inquires for us, that we’ll be back in a few days.”

                             [Illustration]




                           The Forest of Gugu


                               CHAPTER 7

In the central western part of the Gillikin Country is a great tangle of
trees called Gugu Forest. It is the biggest forest in all Oz and
stretches miles and miles in every direction—north, south, east and
west. Adjoining it on the east side is a range of rugged mountains
covered with underbrush and small twisted trees. You can find this place
by looking at the Map of the Land of Oz.

Gugu Forest is the home of most of the wild beasts that inhabit Oz.
These are seldom disturbed in their leafy haunts because there is no
reason why Oz people should go there, except on rare occasions, and most
parts of the forest have never been seen by any eyes but the eyes of the
beasts who make their home there. The biggest beasts inhabit the great
forest, while the smaller ones live mostly in the mountain underbrush at
the east.

Now, you must know that there are laws in the forests, as well as in
every other place, and these laws are made by the beasts themselves, and
are necessary to keep them from fighting and tearing one another to
pieces. In Gugu Forest there is a King—an enormous yellow leopard called
“Gugu”—after whom the forest is named. And this King has three other
beasts to advise him in keeping the laws and maintaining order—Bru the
Bear, Loo the Unicorn and Rango the Gray Ape—who are known as the King’s
Counselors. All these are fierce and ferocious beasts, and hold their
high offices because they are more intelligent and more feared than
their fellows.

Since Oz became a fairyland, no man, woman or child ever dies in that
land nor is anyone ever sick. Likewise the beasts of the forests never
die, so that long years add to their cunning and wisdom, as well as to
their size and strength. It is possible for beasts—or even people—to be
destroyed, but the task is so difficult that it is seldom attempted.
Because it is free from sickness and death is one reason why Oz is a
fairyland, but it is doubtful whether those who come to Oz from the
outside world, as Dorothy and Button-Bright and Trot and Cap’n Bill and
the Wizard did, will live forever or cannot be injured. Even Ozma is not
sure about this, and so the guests of Ozma from other lands are always
carefully protected from any danger, so as to be on the safe side.

In spite of the laws of the forests there are often fights among the
beasts; some of them have lost an eye or an ear or even had a leg torn
off. The King and the King’s Counselors always punish those who start a
fight, but so fierce is the nature of some beasts that they will at
times fight in spite of laws and punishment.

Over this vast, wild Forest of Gugu flew two eagles, one morning, and
near the center of the jungle the eagles alighted on a branch of a tall
tree.

“Here is the place for us to begin our work,” said one, who was Ruggedo,
the Nome.

“Do many beasts live here?” asked Kiki Aru, the other eagle.

“The forest is full of them,” said the Nome. “There are enough beasts
right here to enable us to conquer the people of Oz, if we can get them
to consent to join us. To do that, we must go among them and tell them
our plans, so we must now decide on what shapes we had better assume
while in the forest.”

“I suppose we must take the shapes of beasts?” said Kiki.

“Of course. But that requires some thought. All kinds of beasts live
here, and a yellow leopard is King. If we become leopards, the King will
be jealous of us. If we take the forms of some of the other beasts, we
shall not command proper respect.”

“I wonder if the beasts will attack us?” asked Kiki.

“I’m a Nome, and immortal, so nothing can hurt me,” replied Ruggedo.

“I was born in the Land of Oz, so nothing can hurt me,” said Kiki.

“But, in order to carry out our plans, we must win the favor of all the
animals of the forest.”

“Then what shall we do?” asked Kiki.

“Let us mix the shapes of several beasts, so we will not look like any
one of them,” proposed the wily old Nome. “Let us have the heads of
lions, the bodies of monkeys, the wings of eagles and the tails of wild
asses, with knobs of gold on the end of them instead of bunches of
hair.”

“Won’t that make a queer combination?” inquired Kiki.

“The queerer the better,” declared Ruggedo.

“All right,” said Kiki. “You stay here, and I’ll fly away to another
tree and transform us both, and then we’ll climb down our trees and meet
in the forest.”

“No,” said the Nome, “we mustn’t separate. You must transform us while
we are together.”

“I won’t do that,” asserted Kiki, firmly. “You’re trying to get my
secret, and I won’t let you.”

The eyes of the other eagle flashed angrily, but Ruggedo did not dare
insist. If he offended this boy, he might have to remain an eagle always
and he wouldn’t like that. Some day he hoped to be able to learn the
secret word of the magical transformations, but just now he must let
Kiki have his own way.

“All right,” he said gruffly; “do as you please.”

So Kiki flew to a tree that was far enough distant so that Ruggedo could
not overhear him and said: “I want Ruggedo, the Nome, and myself to have
the heads of lions, the bodies of monkeys, the wings of eagles and the
tails of wild asses, with knobs of gold on the ends of them instead of
bunches of hair—Pyrzqxgl!”

He pronounced the magic word in the proper manner and at once his form
changed to the one he had described. He spread his eagle’s wings and
finding they were strong enough to support his monkey body and lion head
he flew swiftly to the tree where he had left Ruggedo. The Nome was also
transformed and was climbing down the tree because the branches all
around him were so thickly entwined that there was no room between them
to fly.

Kiki quickly joined his comrade and it did not take them long to reach
the ground.




                      The Li-Mon-Eags Make Trouble


                               CHAPTER 8

There had been trouble in the Forest of Gugu that morning. Chipo the
Wild Boar had bitten the tail off Arx the Giraffe while the latter had
his head among the leaves of a tree, eating his breakfast. Arx kicked
with his heels and struck Tirrip, the great Kangaroo, who had a new baby
in her pouch. Tirrip knew it was the Wild Boar’s fault, so she knocked
him over with one powerful blow and then ran away to escape Chipo’s
sharp tusks. In the chase that followed a giant porcupine stuck fifty
sharp quills into the Boar and a chimpanzee in a tree threw a cocoanut
at the porcupine that jammed its head into its body.

All this was against the Laws of the Forest, and when the excitement was
over, Gugu the Leopard King called his royal Counselors together to
decide how best to punish the offenders.

The four lords of the forest were holding solemn council in a small
clearing when they saw two strange beasts approaching them—beasts the
like of which they had never seen before.

Not one of the four, however, relaxed his dignity or showed by a
movement that he was startled. The great Leopard crouched at full length
upon a fallen tree-trunk. Bru the Bear sat on his haunches before the
King; Rango the Gray Ape stood with his muscular arms folded, and Loo
the Unicorn reclined, much as a horse does, between his
fellow-councillors. With one consent they remained silent, eyeing with
steadfast looks the intruders, who were making their way into their
forest domain.

“Well met, Brothers!” said one of the strange beasts, coming to a halt
beside the group, while his comrade with hesitation lagged behind.

“We are not brothers,” returned the Gray Ape, sternly. “Who are you, and
how came you in the forest of Gugu?”