FLORENCE AND DANTE.


Dante is himself the hero of the _Divine Comedy_, and ere many stages of
the _Inferno_ have been passed the reader feels that all his steps are
being taken in a familiar companionship. When every allowance has been
made for what the exigencies of art required him to heighten or
suppress, it is still impossible not to be convinced that the author is
revealing himself much as he really was--in some of his weakness as well
as in all his strength. The poem itself, by many an unconscious touch,
does for his moral portraiture what the pencil of Giotto has done for
the features of his face. The one likeness answers marvellously to the
other; and, together, they have helped the world to recognise in him the
great example of a man of genius who, though at first sight he may seem
to be austere, is soon found to attract our love by the depth of his
feelings as much as he wins our admiration by the wealth of his fancy,
and by the clearness of his judgment on everything concerned with the
lives and destiny of men. His other writings in greater or less degree
confirm the impression of Dante's character to be obtained from the
_Comedy_. Some of them are partly autobiographical; and, studying as a
whole all that is left to us of him, we can gain a general notion of
the nature of his career--when he was born and what was his condition in
life; his early loves and friendships; his studies, military service,
and political aims; his hopes and illusions, and the weary purgatory of
his exile.

To the knowledge of Dante's life and character which is thus to be
acquired, the formal biographies of him have but little to add that is
both trustworthy and of value. Something of course there is in the
traditional story of his life that has come down from his time with the
seal of genuineness; and something that has been ascertained by careful
research among Florentine and other documents. But when all that old and
modern _Lives_ have to tell us has been sifted, the additional facts
regarding him are found to be but few; such at least as are beyond
dispute. Boccaccio, his earliest biographer, swells out his _Life_, as
the earlier commentators on the _Comedy_ do their notes, with what are
plainly but legendary amplifications of hints supplied by Dante's own
words; while more recent and critical writers succeed with infinite
pains in little beyond establishing, each to his own satisfaction, what
was the order of publication of the poet's works, where he may have
travelled to, and when and for how long a time he may have had this or
that great lord for a patron.

A very few pages would therefore be enough to tell the events of Dante's
life as far as they are certainly known. But, to be of use as an
introduction to the study of his great poem, any biographical sketch
must contain some account--more or less full--of Florentine affairs
before and during his lifetime; for among the actors in these are to be
found many of the persons of the _Comedy_. In reading the poem we are
never suffered for long to forget his exile. From one point of view it
is an appeal to future ages from Florentine injustice and ingratitude;
from another, it is a long and passionate plea with his native town to
shake her in her stubborn cruelty. In spite of the worst she can do
against him he remains no less her son. In the early copies of it, the
_Comedy_ is well described as the work of Dante Alighieri, the
Florentine; since not only does he people the other world by preference
with Florentines, but it is to Florence that, even when his words are
bitter against her, his heart is always feeling back. Among the glories
of Paradise he loves to let his memory rest on the church in which he
was baptized and the streets he used to tread. He takes pleasure in her
stones; and with her towers and palaces Florence stands for the
unchanging background to the changing scenes of his mystical pilgrimage.

The history of Florence during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
agrees in general outline with that of most of its neighbours. At the
beginning of the period it was a place of but little importance, ranking
far below Pisa both in wealth and political influence. Though retaining
the names and forms of municipal government, inherited from early times,
it was in reality possessed of no effective control over its own
affairs, and was subject to its feudal superior almost as completely as
was ever any German village planted in the shadow of a castle. To
Florence, as to many a city of Northern and Central Italy, the first
opportunity of winning freedom came with the contest between Emperor
and Pope in the time of Hildebrand. In this quarrel the Church found its
best ally in Matilda, Countess of Tuscany. She, to secure the goodwill
of her subjects as against the Emperor, yielded first one and then
another of her rights in Florence, generally by way of a pious gift--an
endowment for a religious house or an increase of jurisdiction to the
bishop--these concessions, however veiled, being in effect so many
additions to the resources and liberties of the townsmen. She made Rome
her heir, and then Florence was able to play off the Papal against the
Imperial claims, yielding a kind of barren homage to both Emperor and
Pope, and only studious to complete a virtual independence of both.
Florence had been Matilda's favourite place of residence; and,
benefiting largely as it did by her easy rule, it is no wonder that her
name should have been cherished by the Florentines for ages after as a
household word.[1] Nor is the greatest Florentine unmindful of her. Foe
of the Empire though she was, he only remembers her piety; and it is by
Matilda, as representing the active religious life, that Dante is
ushered into the presence of Beatrice in the Earthly Paradise.[2]

It was a true instinct which led Florence and other cities to side
rather with the Pope than with the Emperor in the long-continued
struggle between them for predominance in Italy. With the Pope for
overlord they would at least have a master who was an Italian, and one
who, his title being imperfect, would in his own interest be led to
treat them with indulgence; while, in the permanent triumph of the
Emperor, Italy must have become subject and tributary to Germany, and
would have seen new estates carved out of her fertile soil for members
of the German garrison. The danger was brought home to many of the
youthful commonwealths during the eventful reign of Frederick Barbarossa
(1152-1190). Strong in Germany beyond most of his predecessors, that
monarch ascended the throne with high prerogative views, in which he was
confirmed by the slavish doctrine of some of the new civilians.
According to these there could be only one master in the world; as far
as regarded the things of time, but one source of authority in
Christendom. They maintained everything to be the Emperor's that he
chose to take. When he descended into Italy to enforce his claims, the
cities of the Lombard League met him in open battle. Those of Tuscany,
and especially Florence, bent before the blast, temporising as long as
they were able, and making the best terms they could when the choice lay
between submission and open revolt. Even Florence, it is true, strong in
her allies, did once take arms against an Imperial lieutenant; but as a
rule she never refused obedience in words, and never yielded it in fact
beyond what could not be helped. In her pursuit of advantages,
skilfully using every opportunity, and steadfast of aim even when most
she appeared to waver, she displayed something of the same address that
was long to be noted as a trait in the character of the individual
Florentine.

The storm was weathered, although not wholly without loss. When, towards
the close of his life, and after he had broken his strength against the
obstinate patriotism of Lombardy, Frederick visited Florence in 1185, it
was as a master justly displeased with servants who, while they had not
openly rebelled against him, had yet proved eminently unprofitable, and
whom he was concerned to punish if not to destroy. On the complaint of
the neighbouring nobles, that they were oppressed and had been plundered
by the city, he gave orders for the restoration to them of their lands
and castles. This accomplished, all the territory left to Florence was a
narrow belt around the walls. Villani even says that for the four years
during which Frederick still lived the Commonwealth was wholly landless.
And here, rather than lose ourselves among the endless treaties,
leagues, and campaigns which fill so many pages of the chronicles, it
may be worth while shortly to glance at the constitution of Florentine
society, and especially at the place held in it by the class which found
its protector in Barbarossa.

Much about the time at which the Commonwealth was relieved of its feudal
trammels, as a result of the favour or the necessities of Matilda, it
was beginning to extend its commerce and increase its industry. Starting
somewhat late on the career on which Venice, Genoa, and Pisa were
already far advanced, Florence was as if strenuous to make up for lost
time, and soon displayed a rare comprehension of the nature of the
enterprise. It may be questioned if ever, until quite modern times,
there has been anywhere so clear an understanding of the truth that
public wellbeing is the sum of private prosperity, or such an
enlightened perception of what tends to economical progress. Florence
had no special command of raw material for her manufactures, no sea-port
of her own, and no monopoly unless in the natural genius of her people.
She could therefore thrive only by dint of holding open her
communications with the world at large, and grudged no pains either of
war or diplomacy to keep at Pisa a free way out and in for her
merchandise. Already in the twelfth century she received through that
port the rough woollens of Flanders, which, after being skilfully
dressed and dyed, were sent out at great profit to every market of
Europe. At a somewhat later period the Florentines were to give as
strong a proof of their financial capacity as this was of their
industrial. It was they who first conducted a large business in bills of
exchange, and who first struck a gold coin which, being kept of
invariable purity, passed current in every land where men bought and
sold--even in countries where the very name of Florence was unknown.[3]

In a community thus devoted to industry and commerce, it was natural
that a great place should be filled by merchants. These were divided
into six guilds, the members of which, with the notaries and lawyers,
who composed a seventh, formed the true body of the citizens.
Originally the consuls of these guilds were the only elected officials
in the city, and in the early days of its liberty they were even charged
with political duties, and are found, for example, signing a treaty of
peace with a neighbouring state. In the fully developed commune it was
only the wealthier citizens--the members, we may assume, of these
guilds--who, along with the nobles,[4] were eligible for and had the
right of electing to the public offices. Below them was the great body
of the people; all, that is, of servile condition or engaged in the
meaner kinds of business. From one point of view, the liberties of the
citizens were only their privileges. But although the labourers and
humbler tradesmen were without franchises, their interests were not
therefore neglected, being bound up with those of the one or two
thousand citizens who shared with the patricians the control of public
affairs.

There were two classes of nobles with whom Florence had to reckon as she
awoke to life--those within the walls, and those settled in the
neighbouring country. In later times it was a favourite boast among the
noble citizens--a boast indulged in by Dante--that they were descended
from ancient Roman settlers on the banks of the Arno. A safer boast
would in many cases have been that their ancestors had come to Italy in
the train of Otho and other conquering Emperors. Though settled in the
city, in some cases for generations, the patrician families were not
altogether of it, being distinguished from the other citizens, if not
always by the possession of ancestral landward estates, at least by
their delight in war and contempt for honest industry. But with the
faults of a noble class they had many of its good qualities. Of these
the Republic suffered them to make full proof, allowing them to lead in
war and hold civil offices out of all proportion to their numbers.

Like the city itself, the nobles in the country around had been feudally
subject to the Marquis of Tuscany. After Matilda's death they claimed to
hold direct from the Empire; which meant in practice to be above all
law. They exercised absolute jurisdiction over their serfs and
dependants, and, when favoured by the situation of their castles, took
toll, like the robber barons of Germany, of the goods which passed
beneath their walls. Already they had proved to be thorns in the side of
the industrious burghers; but at the beginning of the twelfth century
their neighbourhood became intolerable, and for a couple of generations
the chief political work of Florence was to bring them to reason. Those
whose lands came up almost to the city gates were first dealt with, and
then in a widening circle the country was cleared of the pest. Year
after year, when the days were lengthening out in spring, the roughly
organised city militia was mustered, war was declared against some
specially obnoxious noble and his fortress was taken by surprise, or,
failing that, was subjected to a siege. In the absence of a more
definite grievance, it was enough to declare his castle dangerously near
the city. These expeditions were led by the nobles who were already
citizens, while the country neighbours of the victim looked on with
indifference, or even helped to waste the lands or force the stronghold
of a rival. The castle once taken, it was either levelled with the
ground, or was restored to the owner on condition of his yielding
service to the Republic. And, both by way of securing a hold upon an
unwilling vassal and of adding a wealthy house and some strong arms to
the Commonwealth, he was compelled, along with his family, to reside in
Florence for a great part of every year.

With a wider territory and an increasing commerce, it was natural for
Florence to assume more and more the attitude of a sovereign state,
ready, when need was, to impose its will upon its neighbours, or to join
with them for the common defence of Tuscany. In the noble class and its
retainers, recruited as has been described, it was possessed of a
standing army which, whether from love of adventure or greed of plunder,
was never so well pleased as when in active employment. Not that the
commons left the fighting wholly to the men of family, for they too, at
the summons of the war-bell, had to arm for the field; but at the best
they did it from a sense of duty, and, without the aid of professional
men-at-arms, they must have failed more frequently in their enterprises,
or at any rate have had to endure a greatly prolonged absence from their
counters and workshops. And yet, esteem this advantage as highly as we
will, Florence surely lost more than it gained by compelling the crowd
of idle gentlemen to come within its walls. In the course of time some
of them indeed condescended to engage in trade--sank, as the phrase
went, into the ranks of the _Popolani_, or mere wealthy citizens; but
the great body of them, while their landed property was being largely
increased in value in consequence of the general prosperity, held
themselves haughtily aloof from honest industry in every form. Each
family, or rather each clan of them, lived apart in its own group of
houses, from among which towers shot aloft for scores of yards into the
air, dominating the humbler dwellings of the common burghers. These,
whenever they came to the front for a time in the government, were used
to decree that all private towers were to be lopped down to within a
certain distance from the ground.

It is a favourite exercise of Villani and other historians to trace the
troubles and revolutions in the state of Florence to chance quarrels
between noble families, arising from an angry word or a broken troth.
Here, they tell, was sown the seed of the Guelf and Ghibeline wars in
Florence; and here that of the feuds of Black and White. Such quarrels
and party names were symptoms and nothing more. The enduring source of
trouble was the presence within the city of a powerful idle class,
constantly eager to recover the privilege it had lost, and to secure
itself by every available means, including that of outside help, in the
possession of what it still retained; which chafed against the curbs put
upon its lawlessness, and whose ambitions were all opposed to the
general interest. The citizens, for their part, had nothing better to
hope for than that Italy should be left to the Italians, Florence to the
Florentines. On the occasion of the celebrated Buondelmonti feud (1215),
some of the nobles definitely went over to the side of the people,
either because they judged it likely to win in the long-run, or
impelled unconsciously by the forces that in every society divide
ambitious men into two camps, and in one form or another develop party
strife. They who made a profession of popular sympathy did it with a
view of using rather than of helping the people at large. Both of the
noble parties held the same end in sight--control of the Commonwealth;
and this would be worth the more the fewer there were to share it. The
faction irreconcilable with the Republic on any terms included many of
the oldest and proudest houses. Their hope lay in the advent of a strong
Emperor, who should depute to them his rights over the money-getting,
low-born crowd.


II.

The opportunity of this class might seem to have come when the
Hohenstaufen Frederick II., grandson of Barbarossa, ascended the throne,
and still more when, on attaining full age, he claimed the whole of the
Peninsula as his family inheritance. Other Emperors had withstood the
Papal claims, but none had ever proved an antagonist like Frederick. His
quarrel seemed indeed to be with the Church itself, with its doctrines
and morals as well as with the ambition of churchmen; and he offered the
strange spectacle of a Roman Emperor--one of the twin lights in the
Christian firmament--whose favour was less easily won by Christian
piety, however eminent, than by the learning of the Arab or the Jew.
When compelled at last to fulfil a promise extorted from him of
conducting a crusade to the Holy Land, he scandalised Christendom by
making friends of the Sultan, and by using his presence in the East, not
for the deliverance of the Sepulchre, but for the furtherance of
learning and commerce. Thrice excommunicated, he had his revenge by
proving with how little concern the heaviest anathemas of the Church
could be met by one who was armed in unbelief. Literature, art, and
manners were sedulously cultivated in his Sicilian court, and among the
able ministers whom he selected or formed, the modern idea of the State
may be said to have had its birth. Free thinker and free liver, poet,
warrior, and statesman, he stood forward against the sombre background
of the Middle Ages a figure in every respect so brilliant and original
as well to earn from his contemporaries the title of the Wonder of the
World.

On the goodwill of Italians Frederick had the claim of being the most
Italian of all the Emperors since the revival of the Western Empire, and
the only one of them whose throne was permanently set on Italian soil.
Yet he never won the popular heart. To the common mind he always
appeared as something outlandish and terrible--as the man who had driven
a profitable but impious trade in the Sultan's land. Dante, in his
childhood, must have heard many a tale of him; and we find him keenly
interested in the character of the Emperor who came nearest to uniting
Italy into a great nation, in whose court there had been a welcome for
every man of intellect, and in whom a great original poet would have
found a willing and munificent patron. In the _Inferno_, by the mouth of
Pier delle Vigne, the Imperial Chancellor, he pronounces Frederick to
have been worthy of all honour;[5] yet justice requires him to lodge
this flower of kings in the burning tomb of the Epicureans, as having
been guilty of the arch-heresy of denying the moral government of the
world, and holding that with the death of the body all is ended.[6] It
was a heresy fostered by the lives of many churchmen, high and low; but
the example of Frederick encouraged the profession of it by nobles and
learned laymen. On Frederick's character there was a still darker stain
than this of religious indifference--that of cold-blooded cruelty. Even
in an age which had produced Ezzelino Romano, the Emperor's cloaks of
lead were renowned as the highest refinement in torture.[7] But, with
all his genius, and his want of scruple in the choice of means, he built
nothing politically that was not ere his death crumbling to dust. His
enduring work was that of an intellectual reformer under whose
protection and with whose personal help his native language was refined,
Europe was enriched with a learning new to it or long forgotten, and the
minds of men, as they lost their blind reverence for Rome, were prepared
for a freer treatment of all the questions with which religion deals. He
was thus in some respects a precursor of Dante.

More than once in the course of Frederick's career it seemed as if he
might become master of Tuscany in fact as well as in name, had Florence
only been as well affected to him as were Siena and Pisa. But already,
as has been said, the popular interest had been strengthened by
accessions from among the nobles. Others of them, without descending
into the ranks of the citizens, had set their hopes on being the first
in a commonwealth rather than privates in the Imperial garrison. These
men, with their restless and narrow ambitions, were as dangerous to have
for allies as for foes, but by throwing their weight into the popular
scale they at least served to hold the Imperialist magnates in check,
and established something like a balance in the fighting power of
Florence; and so, as in the days of Barbarossa, the city was preserved
from taking a side too strongly. The hearts of the Florentine traders
were in their own affairs--in extending their commerce and increasing
their territory and influence in landward Tuscany. As regarded the
general politics of Italy, their sympathy was still with the Roman See;
but it was a sympathy without devotion or gratitude. For refusing to
join in the crusade of 1238 the town was placed under interdict by
Gregory IX. The Emperor meanwhile was acknowledged as its lawful
overlord, and his vicar received something more than nominal obedience,
the choice of the chief magistrates being made subject to his approval.
Yet with all this, and although his party was powerful in the city, it
was but a grudging service that was yielded to Frederick. More than once
fines were levied on the Florentines; and worse punishments were
threatened for their persevering and active enmity to Siena, now
dominated by its nobles and held in the Imperial interest. Volunteers
from Florence might join the Emperor in his Lombard campaigns; but they
were left equally free by the Commonwealth to join the other side. At
last, when he was growing old, and when like his grandfather he had been
foiled by the stubborn Lombards, he turned on the Florentines as an
easier prey, and sent word to the nobles of his party to seize the city.
For months the streets were filled with battle. In January 1248,
Frederick of Antioch, the natural son of the Emperor, entered Florence
with some squadrons of men-at-arms, and a few days later the nobles that
had fought on the popular side were driven into banishment. This is
known in the Florentine annals as the first dispersion of the Guelfs.

Long before they were adopted in Italy, the names of Guelf and Ghibeline
had been employed in Germany to mark the partisans of the Bavarian Welf
and of the Hohenstaufen lords of Waiblingen. On Italian soil they
received an extended meaning: Ghibeline stood for Imperialist; Guelf for
anti-Imperialist, Papalist, or simply Nationalist. When the names began
to be freely used in Florence, which was towards the close of
Frederick's reign and about a century after their first invention, they
denoted no new start in politics, but only supplied a nomenclature for
parties already in existence. As far as Florence was concerned, the
designations were the more convenient that they were not too closely
descriptive. The Ghibeline was the Emperor's man, when it served his
purpose to be so; while the Guelf, constant only in his enmity to the
Ghibelines, was free to think of the Pope as he chose, and to serve him
no more than he wished or needed to. Ultimately, indeed, all Florence
may be said to have become Guelf. To begin with, the name distinguished
the nobles who sought alliance with the citizens, from the nobles who
looked on these as they might have done on serfs newly thriven into
wealth. Each party was to come up in turn. Within a period of twenty
years each was twice driven into banishment, a measure always
accompanied with decrees of confiscation and the levelling of private
strongholds in Florence. The exiles kept well together, retreating, as
it were in the order of war, to camps of observation they found ready
prepared for them in the nearest cities and fortresses held by those of
their own way of thinking. All their wits were then bent on how, by dint
of some fighting and much diplomacy, they might shake the strength and
undermine the credit of their successful rivals in the city, and secure
their own return in triumph. It was an art they were proud to be adepts
in.[8]

In a rapid sketch like this it would be impossible to tell half the
changes made on the constitution of Florence during the second part of
the thirteenth century. Dante in a well-known passage reproaches
Florence with the political restlessness which afflicted her like a
disease. Laws, he says, made in October were fallen into desuetude ere
mid-November.[9] And yet it may be that in this constant readiness to
change, lies the best proof of the political capacity of the
Florentines. It was to meet new necessities that they made provision of
new laws. Especial watchfulness was called for against the encroachments
of the grandees, whose constant tendency--whatever their party
name--was to weaken legal authority, and play the part of lords and
masters of the citizens. But these were no mere weavers and
quill-drivers to be plundered at will. Even before the return of the
Guelfs, banished in 1248, the citizens, taking advantage of a check
suffered in the field by the dominant Ghibelines, had begun to recast
the constitution in a popular sense, and to organise the townsmen as a
militia on a permanent footing. When, on the death of Frederick in 1250,
the Imperialist nobles were left without foreign aid, there began a
period of ten years, favourably known in Florentine history as the
Government of the _Primo Popolo_ or _Popolo Vecchio_; that is, of the
true body of the citizens, commoners possessed of franchises, as
distinguished from the nobles above them and the multitude below. For it
is never to be forgotten that Florence, like Athens, and like the other
Italian Republics, was far from being a true democracy. The time was yet
to come, and it was not far distant, when the ranks of citizenship were
to be more widely opened than now to those below, and more closely shut
to those above. In the meantime the comparatively small number of
wealthy citizens who legally composed the 'People' made good use of
their ten years of breathing-time, entering on commercial treaties and
widening the possessions of the Commonwealth, now by war, and now by
shrewd bargains with great barons. To balance the influence of the
Podesta, who had hitherto been the one great officer of State--criminal
judge, civil governor, and commander-in-chief all in one--they created
the office of Captain of the People. The office of Podesta was not
peculiar to Florence. There, as in other cities, in order to secure his
impartiality, it was provided that he should be a foreigner, and hold
office only for six months. But he was also required to be of gentle
birth; and his councils were so composed that, like his own, their
sympathies were usually with the nobles. The Captain of the People was
therefore created partly as a tribune for the protection of the popular
rights, and partly to act as permanent head of the popular forces. Like
the Podesta, he had two councils assigned to him; but these were
strictly representative of the citizens, and sat to control his conduct
as well as to lend to his action the weight of public opinion.

Such of the Ghibelines as had not been banished from Florence on the
death of Frederick, lived there on sufferance, as it were, and under a
rigid supervision. Once more they were to find a patron and ally in a
member of the great house of Hohenstaufen; and with his aid they were
again for a few years to become supreme in Florence, and to prove by
their abuse of power how well justified was the mistrust the people had
of them. In many ways Manfred, one of Frederick's bastards, was a worthy
son of his father. Like him he was endowed with great personal charm,
and was enamoured of all that opened new regions to intellectual
curiosity or gave refinement to sensual pleasure. In his public as well
as in his private behaviour, he was reckless of what the Church and its
doctrines might promise or threaten; and equally so, his enemies
declared, of the dictates of common humanity. Hostile eyes detected in
the green clothes which were his favourite dress a secret attachment to
Islam; and hostile tongues charged him with the murder of a father and
of a brother, and the attempted murder of a nephew. His ambition did not
aim at the Empire, but only at being King of Sicily and Naples, lands
which the Hohenstaufens claimed as their own through the Norman mother
of Frederick. Of these kingdoms he was actual ruler, even while his
legitimate brother Conrad lived. On the death of that prince he brushed
aside the claims of Conradin, his nephew, and bid boldly for recognition
by the Pope, who claimed to be overlord of the southern kingdoms--a
recognition refused, or given only to be immediately withdrawn. In the
eyes of Rome he was no more than Prince of Tarentum, but by arms and
policy he won what seemed a firm footing in the South; and eight years
after the rule of the _Popolo Vecchio_ began in Florence he was the
acknowledged patron of all in Italy who had been Imperialist--for the
Imperial throne was now practically vacant. And Manfred was trusted all
the more that he cared nothing for Germany, and stood out even more
purely an Italian monarch than his father had ever been. The Ghibelines
of Florence looked to him to free them of the yoke under which they
groaned.

When it was discovered that they were treating with Manfred, there was
an outburst of popular wrath against the disaffected nobles. Some of
them were seized and put to death, a fate shared by the Abbot of
Vallombrosa, whom neither his priestly office nor his rank as Papal
Legate availed to save from torture and a shameful end.[10] Well
accustomed as was the age to violence and cruelty, it was shocked at
this free disposal of a great ecclesiastic by a mercantile community;
and even to the Guelf chronicler Villani the terrible defeat of
Montaperti seemed no more than a just vengeance taken by Heaven upon a
crime so heinous.[11] In the meantime the city was laid under interdict,
and those concerned in the Abbot's death were excommunicated; while the
Ghibelines, taking refuge in Siena, began to plot and scheme with the
greater spirit against foes who, in the very face of a grave peril, had
offended in the Pope their strongest natural ally.

The leader of the exiles was Farinata, one of the Uberti, a family
which, so long ago as 1180, had raised a civil war to force their way
into the consulship. Ever since, they had been the most powerful,
perhaps, and certainly the most restless, clan in Florence, rich in men
of strong character, fiercely tenacious of their purpose. Such was
Farinata. To the Florentines of a later age he was to stand for the type
of the great Ghibeline gentleman, haughty as Lucifer, a Christian in
name though scarcely by profession, and yet almost beloved for his frank
excess of pride. It detracted nothing from the grandeur of his
character, in the judgment of his countrymen, that he could be cunning
as well as brave. Manfred was coy to afford help to the Tuscan
Ghibelines, standing out for an exorbitant price for the loan of his
men-at-arms; and to Farinata was attributed the device by which his
point of honour was effectually touched.[12] When at last a
reinforcement of eight hundred cavalry entered Siena, the exiles and
their allies felt themselves more than a match for the militia of
Florence, and set themselves to decoy it into the field. Earlier in the
same year the Florentines had encamped before Siena, and sought in vain
to bring on a general engagement. They were now misled by false
messengers, primed by Farinata, into a belief that the Sienese, weary of
the arrogance of Provenzano Salvani,[13] then all-powerful in Siena,
were ready to betray a gate to them. In vain did Tegghiaio
Aldobrandi,[14] one of the Guelf nobles, counsel delay till the German
men-at-arms, wearied with waiting on and perhaps dissatisfied with their
wages, should be recalled by Manfred. A march in full strength upon the
hostile city was resolved on by the eager townsmen.

The battle of Montaperti was fought in September 1260, among the earthy
hills washed by the Arbia and its tributary rivulets, a few miles to the
east of Siena. It marked the close of the rule of the _Popolo Vecchio_.
Till then no such disastrous day had come to Florence; and the defeat
was all the more intolerable that it was counted for a victory to Siena.
Yet the battle was far from being a test of the strength of the two
rival cities. Out of the thirty thousand foot in the Guelf army, there
were only about five thousand Florentines. In the host which poured out
on them from Siena, beside the militia of that city and the Florentine
exiles, were included the Ghibelines of Arezzo, the retainers of great
lords still unsubdued by any city, and, above all, the German
men-at-arms of Manfred.[15] But the worst enemies of Florence were the
traitors in her own ranks. She bore it long in mind that it was her
merchants and handicraftsmen who stood stubbornly at bay, and tinged the
Arbia red with their life-blood; while it was among the men of high
degree that the traitors were found. On one of them, Bocca degli Abati,
who struck off the right hand of the standard-bearer of the cavalry, and
so helped on the confusion and the rout, Dante takes vengeance in his
pitiless verse.[16]

The fortifications of Florence had been recently completed and
strengthened, and it was capable of a long defence. But the spirit of
the people was broken for the time, and the conquerors found the gates
open. Then it was that Farinata almost atoned for any wrong he ever did
his native town, by withstanding a proposal made by the Ghibelines of
the rival Tuscan cities, that Florence should be destroyed, and Empoli
advanced to fill her room. 'Alone, with open face I defended her,' Dante
makes him say.[17] But the wonder would rather be if he had voted to
destroy a city of which he was about to be one of the tyrants. Florence
had now a fuller experience than ever of the oppression which it was in
the character of the Ghibelines to exercise. A rich booty lay ready to
their hands; for in the panic after Montaperti crowds of the best in
Florence had fled, leaving all behind them except their wives and
children, whom they would not trust to the cruel mercy of the victors.
It was in this exile that for the first time the industrious citizen was
associated with the Guelf noble. From Lucca, not powerful enough to
grant them protection for long, they were driven to Bologna, suffering
terribly on the passage of the Apennines from cold and want of food, but
safe when the mountains lay between them and the Val d'Arno. While the
nobles and young men with a taste for fighting found their livelihood in
service against the Lombard Ghibelines, the more sober-minded scattered
themselves to seek out their commercial correspondents and increase
their acquaintance with the markets of Europe. When at length the way
was open for them to return home, they came back educated by travel, as
men must always be who travel for a purpose; and from this second exile
of the Guelfs dates a vast extension of the commerce of Florence.

Their return was a fruit of the policy followed by the Papal Court The
interests of both were the same. The Roman See could have as little
independence of action while a hostile monarch was possessed of the
southern kingdoms, as the people of Florence could have freedom while
the Ghibeline nobility had for patron a military prince, to whom their
gates lay open by way of Siena and Pisa. To Sicily and Naples the Pope
laid claim by an alternative title--they were either dependent on the
See of Rome, or, if they were Imperial fiefs, then, in the vacancy of
the Empire, the Pope, as the only head of Christendom, had a right to
dispose of them as he would. A champion was needed to maintain the
claim, and at length the man was found in Charles of Anjou, brother of
St. Louis. This was a prince of intellectual powers far beyond the
common, of untiring industry in affairs, pious, 'chaste as a monk,' and
cold-hearted as a usurer; gifted with all the qualities, in short, that
make a man feared and well served, and with none that make him beloved.
He was not one to risk failure for want of deliberation and foresight,
and his measures were taken with such prudence that by the time he
landed in Italy his victory was almost assured. He found his enemy at
Benevento, in the Neapolitan territory (February 1266). In order to get
time for reinforcements to come up, Manfred sought to enter into
negotiations; but Charles was ready, and knew his advantage. He answered
with the splendid confidence of a man sure of a heavenly if he missed
an earthly triumph. 'Go tell the Sultan of Lucera,'[18] was his reply,
'that to-day I shall send him to Hell, or he will send me to Paradise.'
Manfred was slain, and his body, discovered only after long search, was
denied Christian burial. Yet, excommunicated though he was, and
suspected of being at heart as much Mohammedan as Christian, he, as well
as his great rival, is found by Dante in Purgatory.[19] And, while the
Christian poet pours his invective on the pious Charles,[20] he is at no
pains to hide how pitiful appeared to him the fate of the frank and
handsome Manfred, all whose followers adored him. He, as more than once
it happens in the _Comedy_ to those whose memory is dear to the poet, is
saved from Inferno by the fiction that in the hour of death he sent one
thought heavenward--'so wide is the embrace of infinite mercy.'[21]

To Florence Charles proved a useful if a greedy and exacting protector.
Under his influence as Pacificator of Tuscany--an office created for him
by the Pope--the Guelfs were enabled slowly to return from exile, and
the Ghibelines were gradually depressed into a condition of dependence
on the goodwill of the citizens over whom they had so lately domineered.
Henceforth failure attended every effort they made to lift their heads.
The stubbornly irreconcilable were banished or put to death. Elaborate
provisions were enacted in obedience to the Pope's commands, by which
the rest were to be at peace with their old foes. Now they were to live
in the city, but under disabilities as regarded eligibility to offices;
now they were to be represented in the public councils, but so as to be
always in a minority. The result of the measures taken, and of the
natural drift of things, was that ere many more years had passed there
were no avowed Ghibelines in Florence.

One influence constantly at work in this direction was that of the
_Parte Guelfa_, a Florentine society formed to guard the interests of
the Guelfs, and which was possessed of the greater part of the Ghibeline
property confiscated after the triumph of Charles had turned the balance
of power in Italy. This organisation has been well described as a state
within a state, and it seems as if the part it played in the Florentine
politics of this period were not yet fully known. This much seems sure,
that the members of the Society were mostly Guelf nobles; that its
power, derived from the administration of vast wealth to a political
end, was so great that the Captain of the _Parte Guelfa_ held a place
almost on a level with that of the chief officials of the Commonwealth;
and that it made loans of ready money to Florence and the Pope, on
condition of their being used to the damage of the Ghibelines.[22]

The Commonwealth, busy in resettling its government, was but slightly
interested in much that went on around it. The boy Conradin, grandson of
Frederick, nephew of Manfred, and in a sense the last of the
Hohenstaufens, came to Italy to measure himself with Charles, and paid
for his audacity upon the scaffold.[23] Charles deputed Guy of Montfort,
son of the great Earl Simon, to be his vicar in Florence. The Pope
smiled and frowned in turn on the Florentines, as their devotion to him
waxed and waned; and so he did on his champion Charles, whose ambition
was apt to outrun his piety. All this was of less importance to the
Commonwealth than the promotion of its domestic interests. It saw with
equanimity a check given to Charles by the election of a new Emperor in
Rudolf of Hapsburg (1273), and a further check by the Sicilian Vespers,
which lost him half his kingdom (1283). But Siena and Pisa, Arezzo, and
even Pistoia, were the objects of a sleepless anxiety. Pisa was the
chief source of danger, being both from sentiment and interest
stubbornly Ghibeline. When at length its power was broken by Genoa, its
great maritime rival, in the naval battle of Meloria (1284), there was
no longer any city in Tuscany to be compared for wealth and strength
with Florence.


III.

It was at this period that Dante, reaching the age of manhood, began to
perform the duties that fell to him as a youthful citizen--duties which,
till the age of thirty was reached, were chiefly those of military
service. The family to which he belonged was a branch of the Elisei,
who are included by Villani in the earliest catalogue given by him of
the great Florentine houses. Cacciaguida, one of the Elisei, born in
1106, married a daughter of the Aldighieri, a family of Ferrara. Their
son was christened Aldighiero, and this was adopted by the family as a
surname, afterwards changed to Alighieri. The son of Aldighiero was
Bellincione, father of Aldighiero II., the father of Dante.

It serves no purpose to fill a page of biography with genealogical
details when the hero's course in life was in no way affected by the
accident of who was his grandfather. In the case of Dante, his position
in the State, his political creed, and his whole fashion of regarding
life, were vitally influenced by the circumstances of his birth. He knew
that his genius, and his genius alone, was to procure him fame; he
declares a virtuous and gentle life to be the true proof of nobility:
and yet his family pride is always breaking through. In real life, from
his family's being decayed in wealth and fallen in consideration
compared with its neighbours, he may have been led to put emphasis on
his assertion of gentility; and amid the poverty and humiliations of his
exile he may have found a tonic in the thought that by birth, not to
speak of other things, he was the equal of those who spurned him or
coldly lent him aid. However this may be, there is a tacit claim of
equality with them in the easy grace with which he encounters great
nobles in the world of shades. The bent of his mind in relation to this
subject is shown by such a touch as that when he esteems it among the
glories of Francis of Assisi not to have been ashamed of his base
extraction.[24] In Paradise he meets his great crusading ancestor
Cacciaguida, and feigns contrition for the pleasure with which he
listens to a declaration of the unmixed purity of their common
blood.[25] In Inferno he catches a glimpse, sudden and terrible, of a
kinsman whose violent death had remained unavenged; and, for the nonce,
the philosopher-poet is nothing but the member of an injured Florentine
clan, and winces at the thought of a neglected blood feud.[26] And when
Farinata, the great Ghibeline, and haughtiest of all the Florentines of
the past generation, asks him, 'Who were thine ancestors?' Dante says
with a proud pretence of humility, 'Anxious to obey, I hid nothing, but
told him all he demanded.'[27]

Dante was born in Florence in the May of 1265.[28] A brother of his
father had been one of the guards of the Florentine Caroccio, or
standard-bearing car, at the battle of Montaperti (1260). Whether
Dante's father necessarily shared in the exile of his party may be
doubted. He is said--on slight authority--to have been a jurisconsult:
there is no reason to suppose he was at Montaperti. It is difficult to
believe that Florence was quite emptied of its lawyers and merchants as
a consequence of the Ghibeline victory. In any case, it is certain that
while the fugitive Guelfs were mostly accompanied by their wives, and
did not return till 1267, we have Dante's own word for it that he was
born in the great city by the Arno,[29] and was baptized in the
Baptistery, his beautiful St. John's.[30] At the font he received the
name of Durante, shortened, as he bore it, into Dante. It is in this
form that it finds a place in the _Comedy_,[31] once, and only once,
written down of necessity, the poet says--the necessity of being
faithful in the report of Beatrice's words: from the wider necessity, we
may assume, of imbedding in the work itself the name by which the author
was commonly known, and by which he desired to be called for all time.

When Dante was about ten years old he lost his father. Of his mother
nothing but her Christian name of Bella is known. Neither of them is
mentioned in the _Comedy_,[32] nor indeed are his wife and children.
Boccaccio describes the Alighieri as having been in easy though not in
wealthy circumstances; and Leonardo Bruni, who in the fifteenth century
sought out what he could learn of Dante, says of him that he was
possessed of a patrimony sufficient for an honourable livelihood. That
he was so might be inferred from the character of the education he
received. His studies, says Boccaccio, were not directed to any object
of worldly profit. That there is no sign of their having been directed
by churchmen tends to prove the existence in his native town of a class
of cultivated laymen; and that there was such appears from the ease
with which, when, passing from boyhood to manhood, he felt a craving for
intellectual and congenial society, he found in nobles of the stamp of
Guido Cavalcanti men like-minded with himself. It was indeed impossible
but that the revival of the study of the civil law, the importation of
new learning from the East, and the sceptical spirit fostered in Italy
by the influence of Frederick II. and his court, should all have told on
the keen-witted Florentines, of whom a great proportion--even of the
common people--could read; while the class with leisure had every
opportunity of knowing what was going on in the world.[33] Heresy, the
rough word for intellectual life as well as for religious aspiration,
had found in Florence a congenial soil.[34] In the thirteenth century,
which modern ignorance loves to reckon as having been in a special sense
an age of faith, there were many Florentines who, in spite of their
outward conformity, had drifted as far from spiritual allegiance to the
Church as the furthest point reached by any of their descendants who
some two ages later belonged to the school of Florentine Platonists.

Chief among these free-thinkers, and, sooth to say, free-livers--though
in this respect they were less distinguished from the orthodox--was
Brunetto Latini, for some time Secretary to the Republic, and the
foremost Italian man of letters of his day. Meagre though his greatest
work, the _Tesoro_, or _Treasure_, must seem to any one who now glances
over its pages, to his contemporaries it answered the promise of its
title and stood for a magazine of almost complete information in the
domains of natural history, ethics, and politics. It was written in
French, as being a more agreeable language than Italian; and was
composed, there is reason to believe, while Latini lived in Paris as an
exiled Guelf after Montaperti. His _Tesoretto_, or _Little Treasure_, a
poem in jingling eight-syllabled Italian verse, has been thought by some
to have supplied hints to Dante for the _Comedy_.[35] By neither of
these works is he evinced a man of strong intellect, or even of good
taste. Yet there is the testimony of Villani that he did much to refine
the language of his contemporaries, and to apply fixed principles to the
conduct of State affairs.[36] Dante meets him in Inferno, and hails him
as his intellectual father--as the master who taught him from day to day
how fame is to be won.[37] But it is too much to infer from these words
that Latini served as his teacher, in the common sense of the word. It
is true they imply an intimacy between the veteran scholar and his
young townsman; but the closeness of their intercourse is perhaps best
accounted for by supposing that Latini had been acquainted with Dante's
father, and by the great promise of Dante's boyhood was led to take a
warm interest in his intellectual development. Their intimacy, to judge
from the tone of their conversation down in Inferno, had lasted till
Latini's death. But no tender reminiscence of the days they spent
together avails to save him from condemnation at the hands of his severe
disciple. By the manners of Brunetto, and the Epicurean heresies of
others of his friends, Dante, we may be sure, was never infected or
defiled.

Dante describes himself as having begun the serious study of philosophy
and theology only at the mature age of twenty-seven. But ere that time
he had studied to good effect, and not books alone, but the world around
him too, and the world within. The poet was formed before the theologian
and philosopher. From his earliest years he was used to write in verse;
and he seems to have esteemed as one of his best endowments the easy
command of his mother tongue acquired by him while still in boyhood.

Of the poems written in his youth he made a selection, and with a
commentary gave them to the world as his first work.[38] All the sonnets
and canzoni contained in it bear more or less directly on his love for
Beatrice Portinari. This lady, whose name is so indissolubly associated
with that of Dante, was the daughter of a rich citizen of good family.
When Dante saw her first he was a child of nine, and she a few months
younger. It would seem fabulous, he says, if he related what things he
did, and of what a passion he was the victim during his boyhood. He
seized opportunities of beholding her, but for long never passed beyond
a silent worship; and he was eighteen before she spoke to him, and then
only in the way of a passing salutation. On this he had a vision, and
that inspired him with a sonnet, certainly not the first he had written,
but the first he put into circulation. The mode of publication he
adopted was the common one of sending copies of it to such other poets
as were within reach. The sonnet in itself contains a challenge to
interpret his dream. Several poets attempted the riddle--among them the
philosopher and poet Guido Cavalcanti. They all failed in the solution;
but with some of them he was thus brought into terms of intimacy, and
with Cavalcanti of the closest friendship. Some new grace of style in
Dante's verse, some art in the presentation of his mystical meaning that
escapes the modern reader, may have revealed to the middle-aged man of
letters that a new genius had arisen. It was by Guido's advice that the
poems of which this sonnet stands the first were some years later
collected and published with the explanatory narrative. To him, in a
sense, the whole work is addressed; and it agreed with his taste, as
well as Dante's own, that it should contain nothing but what was written
in the vulgar tongue. Others besides Guido must have recognised in the
little book, as it passed from hand to hand, the masterpiece of Italian
prose, as well as of Italian verse. In the simple title of _Vita Nuova_,
or _The New Life_,[39] we can fancy that a claim is laid to originality
of both subject and treatment. Through the body of the work, though not
so clearly as in the _Comedy_, there rings the note of assurance of
safety from present neglect and future oblivion.

It may be owing to the free use of personification and symbol in the
_Vita Nuova_ that some critics, while not denying the existence of a
real Beatrice, have held that she is introduced only to help out an
allegory, and that, under the veil of love for her, the poet would
express his youthful passion for truth. Others, going to the opposite
extreme, are found wondering why he never sought, or, seeking, failed to
win, the hand of Beatrice. To those who would refine the Beatrice of the
early work into a being as purely allegorical as she of the _Comedy_, it
may be conceded that the _Vita Nuova_ is not so much the history of a
first love as of the new emotional and intellectual life to which a
first love, as Dante experienced it, opens the door. Out of the
incidents of their intercourse he chooses only such as serve for motives
to the joys and sorrows of the passionate aspiring soul. On the other
hand, they who seek reasons why Dante did not marry Beatrice have this
to justify their curiosity, that she did marry another man. But her
husband was one of the rich and powerful Bardi; and her father was so
wealthy that after providing for his children he could endow a hospital
in Florence. The marriage was doubtless arranged as a matter of family
convenience, due regard being had to her dower and her husband's
fortune; and we may assume that when Dante, too, was married later on,
his wife was found for him by the good offices of his friends.[40] Our
manners as regards these things are not those of the Italy of the
thirteenth century. It may safely be said that Dante never dreamed of
Beatrice for his wife; that the expectation of wedding her would have
sealed his lips from uttering to the world any word of his love; and
that she would have lost something in his esteem if, out of love for
him, she had refused the man her father chose for her.

We must not seek in the _Vita Nuova_ what it does not profess to give.
There was a real Beatrice Portinari, to a careless glance perhaps not
differing much from other Florentine ladies of her age and condition;
but her we do not find in Dante's pages. These are devoted to a record
of the dreams and visions, the new thoughts and feelings of which she
was the occasion or the object. He worshipped at a distance, and in a
single glance found reward enough for months of adoration; he read all
heaven into a smile. So high strung is the narrative, that did we come
on any hint of loving dalliance it would jar with all the rest She is
always at a distance from him, less a woman than an angel.

In all this there is certainly as much of reticence as of exaggeration.
When he comes to speak of her death he uses a phrase on which it would
seem as if too little value had been set. He cannot dwell on the
circumstances of her departure, he says, without being his own
panegyrist. Taken along with some other expressions in the _Vita Nuova_,
and the tone of her words to him when they meet in the Earthly Paradise,
we may gather from this that not only was she aware of his long
devotion, but that, ere she died, he had been given to understand how
highly she rated it. And on the occasion of her death, one described as
being her nearest relative by blood and, after Cavalcanti, Dante's chief
friend--her brother, no doubt--came to him and begged him to write
something concerning her. It would be strange indeed if they had never
looked frankly into one another's faces; and yet, for anything that is
directly told in the _Vita Nuova_, they never did.

The chief value of the _Vita Nuova_ is therefore psychological. It is a
mine of materials illustrative of the author's mental and emotional
development, but as regards historical details it is wanting in fulness
and precision. Yet, even in such a sketch of Dante's life as this tries
to be, it is necessary to dwell on the turning-points of the narrative
contained in the _Vita Nuova_; the reader always remembering that on one
side Dante says more than the fact that so he may glorify his love, and
less on another that he may not fail in consideration for Beatrice. She
is first a maiden whom no public breath is to disturb in her virgin
calm; and afterwards a chaste wife, whose lover is as jealous of her
reputation as any husband could be. The youthful lover had begun by
propounding the riddle of his love so obscurely that even by his
fellow-poets it had been found insoluble, adepts though they themselves
were in the art of smothering a thought. Then, though all his longing is
for Beatrice, lest she become the subject of common talk he feigns that
he is in love first with one lady and then with another.[41] He even
pushes his deceit so far that she rebukes him for his fickleness to one
of his sham loves by denying him the customary salutation when they
meet--this salutation being the only sign of friendship she has ever
shown. It is already some few years since the first sonnet was written.
Now, in a ballad containing a more direct avowal of his love than he has
yet ventured on,[42] he protests that it was always Beatrice his heart
was busy with, and that to her, though his eyes may have seemed to
wander, his affection was always true. In the very next poem we find him
as if debating with himself whether he shall persevere. He weighs the
ennobling influence of a pure love and the sweetness it gives to life,
against the pains and self-denial to which it condemns its servant.
Here, he tells us in his commentary, he was like a traveller who has
come to where the ways divide. His only means of escape--and he feels it
is a poor one--is to throw himself into the arms of Pity.

From internal evidence it seems reasonably certain that the marriage of
Beatrice fell at the time when he describes himself as standing at the
parting of the ways. Before that he has been careful to write of his
love in terms so general as to be understood only by those in possession
of the key. Now he makes direct mention of her, and seeks to be in her
company; and he even leads us to infer that it was owing to his poems
that she became a well-known personage in the streets of Florence.
Immediately after the sonnet in which he has recourse to Pity, he tells
how he was led by a friend into the house of a lady, married only that
day, whom they find surrounded by her lady friends, met to celebrate her
home-coming after marriage. It was the fashion for young gentlemen to
offer their services at such a feast. On this occasion Dante for one can
give no help. A sudden trembling seizes him; he leans for support
against the painted wall of the chamber; then, lifting his eyes to see
if the ladies have remarked his plight, he is troubled at beholding
Beatrice among them, with a smile on her lips, as, leaning towards her,
they mock at her lover's weakness. To his friend, who, as he leads him
from the chamber, asks what ails him, he replies: 'My feet have reached
that point beyond which if they pass they can never return.' It was only
matrons that gathered round a bride at her home-coming; Beatrice was
therefore by this time a married woman. That she was but newly married
we may infer from Dante's confusion on finding her there.[43] His secret
has now been discovered, and he must either renounce his love, or, as he
is at length free to do, Beatrice being married, declare it openly, and
spend his life in loyal devotion to her as the mistress of his
imagination and of his heart.[44]

But how is he to pursue his devotion to her, and make use of his new
privilege of freer intercourse, when the very sight of her so unmans
him? He writes three sonnets explaining what may seem pusillanimity in
him, and resolves to write no more. Now comes the most fruitful episode
in the history. Questioned by a bevy of fair ladies what is the end of a
love like his, that cannot even face the object of its desire, he
answers that his happiness lies in the words by which he shows forth the
praises of his mistress. He has now discovered that his passion is its
own reward. In other words, he has succeeded in spiritualising his love;
although to a careless reader it might seem in little need of passing
through the process. Then, soon after, as he walks by a crystal brook,
he is inspired with the words which begin the noblest poem he had yet
produced,[45] and that as the author of which he is hailed by a
fellow-poet in Purgatory. It is the first to glorify Beatrice as one in
whom Heaven is more concerned than Earth; and in it, too, he anticipates
his journey through the other world. She dies,[46] and we are surprised
to find that within a year of her death he wavers in his allegiance to
her memory. A fair face, expressing a tender compassion, looks down on
him from a window as he goes nursing his great sorrow; and he loves the
owner of the face because she pities him. But seeing Beatrice in a
vision he is restored, and the closing sonnet tells how his whole desire
goes forth to her, and how his spirit is borne above the highest sphere
to behold her receiving honour, and shedding radiance on all around her.
The narrative closes with a reference to a vision which he does not
recount, but which incites him to severe study in order that he may
learn to write of her as she deserves. And the last sentence of the
_Vita Nuova_ expresses a hope--a hope which would be arrogant coming
after anything less perfect than the _Vita Nuova_--that, concerning her,
he shall yet say things never said before of any woman. Thus the poet's
earliest work contains an earnest of the latest, and his morning makes
one day with his evening.

The narrative of the _Vita Nuova_ is fluent and graceful, in this
contrasting strongly with the analytical arguments attached to the
various poems. Dante treats his readers as if they were able to catch
the meaning of the most recondite allegory, and yet were ignorant of the
alphabet of literary form. And, as is the case with other poets of the
time, the free movement of his fancy is often hampered by the necessity
he felt of expressing himself in the language of the popular scholastic
philosophy. All this is but to say that he was a man of his period, as
well as a great genius. And even in this his first work he bettered the
example of Guido Cavalcanti, Guido of Bologna, and the others whom he
found, but did not long suffer to remain, the masters of Italian
verse.[47] These inherited from the Provençal and Sicilian poets much
of the cant of which European poetry has been so slow to clear itself;
and chiefly that of presenting all human emotion and volition under the
figure of love for a mistress, who was often merely a creature of fancy,
set up to act as Queen of Beauty while the poet ran his intellectual
jousts. But Dante dealt in no feigned inspiration, and distinguishes
himself from the whole school of philosophical and artificial poets as
'one who can only speak as love inspires.'[48] He may deal in allegory
and utter sayings dark enough, but the first suggestions of his thoughts
are obtained from facts of emotion or of real life. His lady was no
creature of fancy, but his neighbour Beatrice Portinari: and she who
ends in the _Paradiso_ as the embodied beauty of holiness was, to begin
with, a fair Florentine girl.

The instance of Beatrice is the strongest, although others might be
adduced, to illustrate Dante's economy of actual experience; the skilful
use, that is, of real emotions and incidents to serve for suggestion and
material of poetical thought. As has been told, towards the close of the
_Vita Nuova_ he describes how he found a temporary consolation for the
loss of Beatrice in the pity of a fair and noble lady. In his next work,
the _Convito_, or _Banquet_, she appears as the personification of
philosophy. The plan of the _Convito_ is that of a commentary on odes
which are interpreted as having various meanings--among others the
literal as distinguished from the allegorical or essentially true. As
far as this lady is concerned, Dante shows some eagerness to pass from
the literal meaning; desirous, it may be, to correct the belief that he
had ever wavered in his exclusive devotion to Beatrice. That for a time
he did transfer his thoughts from Beatrice in Heaven to the fair lady of
the window is almost certain, and by the time he wrote the _Purgatorio_
he was able to make confession of such a fault. But at the earlier
period at which the _Convito_[49] was written, he may have come to
regard the avowal in the _Vita Nuova_ as an oversight dishonouring to
himself as well as to his first love, and so have slurred it over,
leaving the fact to stand enveloped in an allegory. At any rate, to his
gloss upon this passage in his life we are indebted for an interesting
account of how, at the age of twenty-seven, he put himself to school:--

    'After losing the earliest joy of my life, I was so smitten with
    sorrow that in nothing could I find any comfort. Yet after some
    time my mind, eager to recover its tone, since nought that I or
    others could do availed to restore me, directed itself to find how
    people, being disconsolate, had been comforted. And so I took to
    reading that little-known book by Boethius, by writing which he,
    captive and in exile, had obtained relief. Next, hearing that Tully
    as well had written a book in which, treating of friendship, he had
    consoled the worthy Laelius on the occasion of the loss of his
    friend Scipio, I read that too. And though at the first I found
    their meaning hard, at last I comprehended it as far as my
    knowledge of the language and some little command of mother-wit
    enabled me to do: which same mother-wit had already helped me to
    much, as may be seen by the _Vita Nuova_. And as it often happens
    that a man goes seeking silver, and lights on gold he is not
    looking for--the result of chance, or of some divine provision; so
    I, besides finding the consolation I was in search of to dry my
    tears, became possessed of wisdom from authors and sciences and
    books. Weighing this well, I deemed that philosophy, the mistress
    of these authors, sciences, and books, must be the best of all
    things. And imagining her to myself fashioned like a great lady,
    rich in compassion, my admiration of her was so unbounded that I
    was always delighting myself in her image. And from thus beholding
    her in fancy I went on to frequent the places where she is to be
    found in very deed--in the schools of theology, to wit, and the
    debates of philosophers. So that in a little time, thirty months or
    so, I began to taste so much of her sweetness that the love I bore
    to her effaced or banished every other thought.'[50]

No one would guess from this description of how he grew enamoured of
philosophy, that at the beginning of his arduous studies Dante took a
wife. She was Gemma, the daughter of Manetto Donati, but related only
distantly, if at all, to the great Corso Donati. They were married in
1292, he being twenty-seven; and in the course of the nine years that
elapsed till his exile she bore him five sons and two daughters.[51]
From his silence regarding her in his works, and from some words of
Boccaccio's which apply only to the period of his exile, it has been
inferred that the union was unhappy. But Dante makes no mention in his
writings of his parents or children any more than of Gemma.[52] And why
should not his wife be included among the things dearest to him which,
he tells us, he had to leave behind him on his banishment? For anything
we know to the contrary, their wedded life up to the time of his exile
may have been happy enough; although most probably the marriage was one
of convenience, and almost certainly Dante found little in Gemma's mind
that answered to his own.[53] In any case it is not safe to lay stress
upon his silence. During the period covered by the _Vita Nuova_ he
served more than once in the field, and to this none of his earlier
works make any reference. In 1289, Arezzo having warmly espoused the
Ghibeline cause, the Florentines, led by Corso Donati and the great
merchant Vieri dei Cerchi, took up arms and met the foe in the field of
Campaldino, on the edge of the upland region of the Casentino. Dante, as
a young man of means and family, fought in the vanguard;[54] and in a
letter partly preserved by one of his early biographers[55] he describes
himself as being then no tiro in arms, and as having with varying
emotions watched the fortunes of the day. From this it is clear that he
had served before, probably in an expedition into the Aretine territory
made in the previous year, and referred to in the _Inferno_.[56] In the
same year as Campaldino was won he was present at the surrender of
Caprona, a fortress belonging to Pisa.[57] But of all this he is silent
in his works, or only makes casual mention of it by way of illustration.
It is, therefore, a waste of time trying to prove his domestic misery
from his silence about his marriage.


IV.

So hard a student was Dante that he now for a time nearly lost the use
of his eyes.[58] But he was cured by regimen, and came to see as well as
ever, he tells us; which we can easily believe was very well indeed. For
his work, as he planned it out, he needed all his powers. The _Convito_,
for example, was designed to admit of a full treatment of all that
concerns philosophy. It marks an earlier stage of his intellectual and
spiritual life than does the opening of the _Inferno_. In it we have the
fruit of the years during which he was wandering astray from his early
ideal, misled by what he afterwards came to count as a vain and
profitless curiosity. Most of its contents, as we have it,[59] are only
indirectly interesting. It is impossible for most people to care for
discussions, conducted with all the nicety of scholastic definition, on
such subjects as the system of the universe as it was evolved out of the
brains of philosophers; the subject-matter of knowledge; and how we
know. But there is one section of it possessed of a very special
interest, the Fourth, in which he treats of the nature of nobility.
This he affirms to be independent of wealth or ancestry, and he finds
every one to be noble who practises the virtues proper to his time of
life. 'None of the Uberti of Florence or the Visconti of Milan can say
he is noble because belonging to such or such a race; for the Divine
seed is sown not in a family but in the individual man.' This amounts,
it must be admitted, to no more than saying that high birth is one
thing, and nobility of character another; but it is significant of what
were the current opinions, that Dante should be at such pains to
distinguish between the two qualities. The canzone which supplies the
text for the treatise closes with a picture of the noble soul at every
stage of life, to which Chaucer may well have been indebted for his
description of the true gentleman:[60]--'The soul that is adorned by
this grace does not keep it hid, but from the day when soul is wed to
body shows it forth even until death. In early life she is modest,
obedient, and gentle, investing the outward form and all its members
with a gracious beauty: in youth she is temperate and strong, full of
love and courteous ways, delighting in loyal deeds: in mature age she is
prudent, and just, and apt to liberality, rejoicing to hear of others'
good. Then in the fourth stage of life she is married again to God,[61]
and contemplates her approaching end with thankfulness for all the
past.'[62]

In this passage it is less the poet that is heard than the sober
moralist, one with a ripe experience of life, and contemptuous of the
vulgar objects of ambition. The calm is on the surface. As has been said
above, he was proud of his own birth, the more proud perhaps that his
station was but a middling one; and to the close of his life he hated
upstarts with their sudden riches, while the Philip Argenti on whom in
the _Inferno_ he takes what has much the air of a private revenge may
have been only a specimen of the violent and haughty nobles with whom he
stood on an uneasy footing.

Yet the impression we get of Dante's surroundings in Florence from the
_Vita Nuova_ and other poems, from references in the _Comedy_, and from
some anecdotes more or less true which survive in the pages of Boccaccio
and elsewhere, is on the whole a pleasant one. We should mistake did we
think of him as always in the guise of absorbed student or tearful
lover. Friends he had, and society of various kinds. He tells how in a
severe illness he was nursed by a young and noble lady, nearly related
to him by blood--his sister most probably; and other ladies are
mentioned as watching in his sick-chamber.[63] With Forese and Piccarda
Donati, brother and sister of the great Corso Donati, he was on terms of
the warmest friendship.[64] From the _Vita Nuova_ we can gather that,
even when his whole heart fainted and failed at the mere sight of
Beatrice, he was a favourite with other ladies and conversed familiarly
with them. The brother of Beatrice was his dear friend; while among
those of the elder generation he could reckon on the friendship of such
men as Guido Cavalcanti and Brunetto Latini. Through Latini he would,
even as a young man, get the entry of the most lettered and
intellectually active society of Florence. The tradition of his intimacy
with Giotto is supported by the mention he makes of the painter,[65] and
by the fact, referred to in the _Vita Nuova_, that he was himself a
draughtsman. It is to be regretted there are not more anecdotes of him
on record like that which tells how one day as he drew an angel on his
tablets he was broken in upon by 'certain people of importance.' The
musician Casella, whom he 'woes to sing in Purgatory'[66] and Belacqua,
the indolent good-humoured lutemaker,[67] are greeted by him in a tone
of friendly warmth in the one case and of easy familiarity in the other,
which help us to know the terms on which he stood with the quick-witted
artist class in Florence.[68] Already he was in the enjoyment of a high
reputation as a poet and scholar, and there seemed no limit to the
greatness he might attain to in his native town as a man of action as
well as a man of thought.

In most respects the Florence of that day was as fitting a home for a
man of genius as could well be imagined. It was full of a life which
seemed restless only because the possibilities of improvement for the
individual and the community seemed infinite. A true measure of its
political progress and of the activity of men's minds is supplied by the
changes then being made in the outward aspect of the city. The duties of
the Government were as much municipal as political, and it would have
surprised a Florentine to be told that the one kind of service was of
less dignity than the other. The population grew apace, and, to provide
the means for extending the city walls, every citizen, on pain of his
testament being found invalid, was required to bequeath a part of his
estate to the public. Already the banks of the Arno were joined by three
bridges of stone, and the main streets were paved with the
irregularly-shaped blocks of lava still familiar to the sojourner in
Florence. But between the time of Dante's boyhood and the close of the
century the other outstanding features of the city were greatly altered,
or were in the course of change. The most important churches of
Florence, as he first knew it, were the Baptistery and the neighbouring
small cathedral church of Santa Reparata; after these ranked the church
of the Trinity, Santo Stefano, and some other churches which are now
replaced by larger ones, or of which the site alone can be discovered.
On the other side of the river, Samminiato with its elegant façade rose
as now upon its hill.[69] The only great civic building was the Palace
of the Podesta. The Old Market was and had long been the true centre of
the city's life.

At the time Dante went into exile Arnolfo was already working on the
great new cathedral of St. Mary of the Flowers, the spacious Santa
Croce, and the graceful Badia; and Santa Maria Novella was slowly
assuming the perfection of form that was later to make it the favourite
of Michel Angelo. The Palace of the Signory was already planned, though
half a century was to elapse before its tower soared aloft to daunt the
private strongholds which bristled, fierce and threatening, all over the
city. The bell-tower of Giotto, too, was of later erection--the only
pile we can almost regret that Dante never saw. The architect of it was
however already adorning the walls of palace and cloister with paintings
whose inspiration was no longer, like that of the works they
overshadowed, drawn from the outworn motives of Byzantine art, but from
the faithful observation of nature.[70] He in painting and the Pisan
school in sculpture were furnishing the world with novel types of beauty
in the plastic arts, answering to the 'sweet new style' in verse of
which it was Dante that discovered the secret.[71]

Florence was now by far the leading city in Tuscany. Its merchants and
money-dealers were in correspondence with every Mediterranean port and
with every country of the West. Along with bales of goods and letters of
exchange new ideas and fresh intelligence were always on the road to
Florence. The knowledge of what was going on in the world, and of what
men were thinking, was part of the stock-in-trade of the quick-witted
citizens, and they were beginning to be employed throughout Europe in
diplomatic work, till then almost a monopoly of churchmen. 'These
Florentines seem to me to form a fifth element,' said Boniface, who had
ample experience of how accomplished they were.

At home they had full employment for their political genius; and still
upon the old problem, of how to curb the arrogance of the class that, in
place of being satisfied to share in the general prosperity, sought its
profit in the maintenance of privilege. It is necessary, at the cost of
what may look like repetition, to revert to the presence and activity of
this class in Florence, if we are to form a true idea of the
circumstances of Dante's life, and enter into the spirit with which much
of the _Comedy_ is informed. Though many of the nobles were now engaged
in commerce and figured among the popular leaders, most of the greater
houses stood proudly aloof from everything that might corrupt their
gentility. These were styled the magnates: they found, as it were, a
vocation for themselves in being nobles. Among them the true distinctive
spirit of Ghibelinism survived, although none of them would now have
dared to describe himself as a Ghibeline. Their strength lay partly in
the unlimited control they retained over the serfs on their landward
estates; in the loyalty with which the members of a family held by one
another; in their great command of resources as the administrators of
the _Parte Guelfa_; and in the popularity they enjoyed with the smaller
people in consequence of their lavish expenditure, and frank if insolent
manners. By law scarcely the equals of the full citizens, in point of
fact they tyrannised over them. Their houses, set like fortresses in the
crowded streets, frequently served as prisons and torture-chambers for
the low-born traders or artisans who might offend them.

Measures enough had been passed towards the close of the century with a
view to curb the insolence of the magnates; but the difficulty was to
get them put in force. At length, in 1294, they, with many additional
reforms, were embodied in the celebrated Ordinances of Justice. These
for long were counted back to as the Great Charter of Florence--a Great
Charter defining the popular rights and the disabilities of the
baronage. Punishments of special severity were enacted for nobles who
should wrong a plebeian, and the whole of a family or clan was made
responsible for the crimes and liabilities of its several members. The
smaller tradesmen were conciliated by being admitted to a share in
political influence. If serfage was already abolished in the State of
Florence, it was the Ordinances which made it possible for the serf to
use his liberty.[72] But the greatest blow dealt to the nobles by the
new laws was their exclusion, as nobles, from all civil and political
offices. These they could hold only by becoming members of one of the
trade guilds.[73] And to deprive a citizen of his rights it was enough
to inscribe his name in the list of magnates.

It is not known in what year Dante became a member of the Guild of
Apothecaries. Without much reason it has been assumed that he was one of
the nobles who took advantage of the law of 1294. But there is no
evidence that in his time the Alighieri ranked as magnates, and much
ground for believing that for some considerable time past they had
belonged to the order of full citizens.

It was not necessary for every guildsman to practise the art or engage
in the business to which his guild was devoted, and we are not required
to imagine Dante as having anything to do with medicine or with the
spices and precious stones in which the apothecaries traded. The guilds
were political as much as industrial associations, and of the public
duties of his membership he took his full share. The constitution of the
Republic, jealously careful to limit the power of the individual
citizen, provided that the two chief executive officers, the Podesta and
the Captain of the People, should always be foreigners. They held office
only for six months. To each of them was assigned a numerous Council,
and before a law could be abrogated or a new one passed it needed the
approval of both these Councils, as well as that of the Priors, and of
the heads of the principal guilds. The Priors were six in number, one
for each district of the city. With them lay the administration in
general of the laws, and the conduct of foreign affairs. Their office
was elective, and held for two months.[74] Of one or other of the
Councils Dante is known to have been a member in 1295, 1296, 1300, and
1301.[75] In 1299 he is found engaged on a political mission to the
little hill-city of San Gemigniano, where in the town-house they still
show the pulpit from which he addressed the local senate.[76] From the
middle of June till the middle of August 1300 he served as one of the
Priors.[77]

At the time when Dante entered on this office, Florence was distracted
by the feud of Blacks and Whites, names borrowed from the factions of
Pistoia, but fated to become best known from their use in the city which
adopted them. The strength of the Blacks lay in the nobles whom the
Ordinances of Justice had been designed to depress; both such of them as
had retained their standing as magnates, and such as, under the new law,
had unwillingly entered the ranks of the citizens. Already they had
succeeded in driving into exile Giano della Bella,[78] the chief author
of the Ordinances; and their efforts--and those of the citizens who,
fearing the growing power of the lesser guilds, were in sympathy with
them--were steadily directed to upset the reforms. An obvious means to
this end was to lower in popular esteem the public men whose policy it
was to govern firmly on the new lines. The leader of the discontented
party was Corso Donati, a man of small fortune, but of high birth; of
splendid personal appearance, open-handed, and of popular manners. He
and they who went with him affected a violent Guelfism, their chance of
recovering the control of domestic affairs being the better the more
they could frighten the Florentines with threats of evils like those
incurred by the Aretines and Pisans from Ghibeline oppression. It may be
imagined what meaning the cry of Ghibeline possessed in days when there
was still a class of beggars in Florence--men of good names--whose eyes
had been torn out by Farinata and his kind.

One strong claim which Corso Donati had on the goodwill of his
fellow-townsmen was that by his ready courage in pushing on the
reserves, against superior orders, at the battle of Campaldino,[79] the
day had been won to Florence and her allies. As he rode gallantly
through the streets he was hailed as the Baron (_il Barone_), much as in
the last generation the victor of Waterloo was sufficiently
distinguished as the Duke. At the same battle, Vieri dei Cerchi, the
leader of the opposite party of the Whites, had shown no less bravery,
but he was ignorant of the art, or despised it, of making political
capital out of the performance of his duty. In almost every respect he
offered a contrast to Donati. He was of a new family, and his influence
depended not on landed possessions, though he had these too, but on
wealth derived from commerce.[80] According to John Villani, a competent
authority on such a point,[81] he was at the head of one of the greatest
trading houses in the world. The same crowds that cheered Corso as the
great Baron sneered at the reticent and cold-tempered merchant as the
Ghibeline. It was a strange perversion of ideas, and yet had this of
justification, that all the nobles of Ghibeline tendency and all the
citizens who, on account of their birth, were suspected of leaning that
way were driven into the party of the Whites by the mere fact of the
Blacks hoisting so defiantly the Guelf flag, and commanding the
resources of the _Parte Guelfa_. But if Ghibelinism meant, as fifty
years previously it did mean, a tendency to exalt privilege as against
the general liberties and to court foreign interference in the affairs
of Florence, it was the Blacks and not the Whites who had served
themselves heirs to Ghibelinism. That the appeal was now taken to the
Pope instead of to the Emperor did not matter; or that French soldiers
in place of German were called in to settle domestic differences.

The Roman See was at this time filled by Boniface VIII., who six years
previously, by violence and fraud, had procured the resignation of
Celestine V.--him who made the great refusal.[82] Boniface was at once
arrogant and subtle, wholly faithless, and hampered by no scruple
either of religion or humanity. But these qualities were too common
among those who before and after him filled the Papal throne, to secure
him in a special infamy. That he has won from the ruthless hatred which
blazes out against him in many a verse of Dante's,[83] and for this
hatred he is indebted to his interference in the affairs of Florence,
and what came as one of the fruits of it--the poet's exile.

And yet, from the point of view not only of the interest of Rome but
also of Italy, there is much to be said for the policy of Boniface.
German domination was a just subject of fear, and the Imperialist
element was still so strong in Northern and Central Italy, that if the
Emperor Albert[84] had been a man of a more resolute ambition, he
might--so contemporaries deemed--have conquered Italy at the cost of a
march through it. The cities of Romagna were already in Ghibeline
revolt, and it was natural that the Pope should seek to secure Florence
on the Papal side. It was for the Florentines rather than for him to
judge what they would lose or gain by being dragged into the current of
general politics. He made a fair beginning with an attempt to reconcile
the two parties. The Whites were then the dominant faction, and to them
reconciliation meant that their foes would at once divide the
government with them, and at the long-run sap the popular liberties,
while the Pope's hand would soon be allowed to dip freely into the
communal purse. The policy of the Whites was therefore one of steady
opposition to all foreign meddling with Florence. But it failed to
secure general support, for without being Ghibeline in fact it had the
air of being so; and the name of Ghibeline was one that no reasoning
could rob of its terrors.[85]

As was usual in Florence when political feeling ran high, the hotter
partisans came to blows, and the streets were more than once disturbed
by violence and bloodshed. To an onlooker it must have seemed as if the
interposition of some external authority was desirable; and almost on
the same day as the new Priors, of whom Dante was one and who were all
Whites, took office in the June of 1300, the Cardinal Acquasparta
entered the city, deputed by the Pope to establish peace. His proposals
were declined by the party in power, and having failed in his mission he
left the city, and took the priestly revenge upon it of placing it under
interdict.[86] Ere many months were passed, the Blacks, at a meeting of
the heads of the party, resolved to open negotiations anew with
Boniface. For this illegal step some of them, including Corso Donati,
were ordered into exile by the authorities, who, to give an appearance
of impartiality to their proceedings, at the same time banished some of
the Whites, and among them Guido Cavalcanti. It was afterwards made a
charge against Dante that he had procured the recall of his friend Guido
and the other Whites from exile; but to this he could answer that he was
not then in office.[87] Corso in the meantime was using his enforced
absence from Florence to treat freely with the Pope.

Boniface had already entered into correspondence with Charles of Valois,
brother of Philip, the reigning King of France, with the view of
securing the services of a strongly-connected champion. It was the game
that had been played before by the Roman Court when Charles of Anjou was
called to Italy to crush the Hohenstaufens. This second Charles was a
man of ability of a sort, as he had given cruel proof in his brother's
Flemish wars. By the death of his wife, daughter of his kinsman Charles
II. of Naples and so grand-daughter of Charles of Anjou, he had lost the
dominions of Maine and Anjou, and had got the nickname of Lackland from
his want of a kingdom. He lent a willing ear to Boniface, who presented
him with the crown of Sicily on condition that he first wrested it from
the Spaniard who wore it.[88] All the Papal influence was exerted to get
money for the expenses of the descent on Sicily. Even churchmen were
required to contribute, for it was a holy war, and the hope was that
when Charles, the champion of the Church, had reduced Italy to
obedience, won Sicily for himself by arms, and perhaps the Eastern
Empire by marriage, he would win the Holy Sepulchre for Christendom.

Charles crossed the Alps in August 1301, with five hundred men-at-arms,
and, avoiding Florence on his southward march, found Boniface at his
favourite residence of Anagni. He was created Pacificator of Tuscany,
and loaded with other honours. What better served the purpose of his
ambition, he was urged to retrace his steps and justify his new title by
restoring peace to Florence. There the Whites were still in power, but
they dared not declare themselves openly hostile to the Papal and Guelf
interest by refusing him admission to the city. He came with gentle
words, and ready to take the most stringent oaths not to tamper with the
liberties of the Commonwealth; but once he had gained an entrance
(November 1301) and secured his hold on Florence, he threw off every
disguise, gave full play to his avarice, and amused himself with looking
on at the pillage of the dwellings and warehouses of the Whites by the
party of Corso Donati. By all this, says Dante, Charles 'gained no
land,' Lackland as he was, 'but only sin and shame.'[89]

There is a want of precise information as to the events of this time.
But it seems probable that Dante formed one of an embassy sent by the
rulers of Florence to the Pope in the autumn of this year; and that on
the occasion of the entrance of Charles he was absent from Florence.
What the embassy had to propose which Boniface could be expected to be
satisfied with, short of complete submission, is not known and is not
easy to guess. It seems clear at least that Dante cannot have been
chosen as a person likely to be specially pleasing to the Roman Court.
Within the two years preceding he had made himself prominent in the
various Councils of which he was a member, by his sturdy opposition to
affording aid to the Pope in his Romagnese wars. It is even possible
that his theory of the Empire was already more or less known to
Boniface, and as that Pontiff claimed Imperial authority over such
states as Florence, this would be sufficient to secure him a rough
reception.[90] Where he was when the terrible news came to him that for
some days there had been no law in Florence, and that Corso Donati was
sharing in the triumph of Charles, we do not know. Presageful of worse
things to come, he did not seek to return, and is said to have been in
Siena when he heard that, on the 27th January 1302, he had been
sentenced to a heavy fine and political disabilities for having been
guilty of extortion while a Prior, of opposing the coming of Charles,
and of crimes against the peace of Florence and the interest of the
_Parte Guelfa_. If the fine was not paid within three days his goods and
property were to be confiscated. This condemnation he shared with three
others. In the following March he was one of twelve condemned, for
contumacy, to be burned alive if ever they fell into the hands of the
Florentine authorities. We may perhaps assume that the cruel sentence,
as well as the charge of peculation, was uttered only in order to
conform to some respectable precedents.


V.

Besides Dante many other Whites had been expelled from Florence.[91]
Whether they liked it or not, they were forced to seek aid from the
Ghibelines of Arezzo and Romagna. This led naturally to a change of
political views, and though at the time of their banishment all of them
were Guelfs in various degrees, as months and years went on they
developed into Ghibelines, more or less declared. Dissensions, too,
would be bred among them out of recriminations touching the past, and
charges of deserting the general interest for the sake of securing
private advantage in the way of making peace with the Republic. For a
time, however, the common desire of gaining a return to Florence held
them together. Of the Council constituted to bring this about, Dante was
a member. Once only with his associates does he appear to have come the
length of formal negotiations with a view to getting back. Charles of
Valois had passed away from the temporary scene of his extortions and
treachery, upon the futile quest of a crown. Boniface, ere being
persecuted to death by his old ally, Philip of France (1303), had vainly
attempted to check the cruelty of the Blacks; and Benedict, his
successor, sent the Cardinal of Ostia to Florence with powers to
reconcile the two parties. Dante is usually credited with the
composition of the letter in which Vieri dei Cerchi and his
fellow-exiles answered the call of the Cardinal to discuss the
conditions of their return home. All that had been done by the banished
party, said the letter, had been done for the public good.[92] The
negotiations came to nothing; nor were the exiles more fortunate in
arms. Along with their allies they did once succeed by a sudden dash in
penetrating to the market-place, and Florence lay within their grasp
when, seized with panic, they turned and fled from the city, which many
of them were never to see again.

Almost certainly Dante took no active part in this attempt, and indeed
there is little to show that he was ever heartily associated with the
exiles. In his own words, he was compelled to break with his companions
owing to their imbecility and wickedness, and to form a party by
himself.[93] With the Whites, then, he had little more to do; and the
story of their fortunes need not longer detain us. It is enough to say
that while, like Dante, the chief men among them were for ever excluded
from Florence, the principles for which they had contended survived, and
even obtained something like a triumph within its walls. The success of
Donati and his party, though won with the help of the people, was too
clearly opposed to the popular interest to be permanent. Ere long the
inveterate contradiction between magnate and merchant was again to
change the course of Florentine politics; the disabilities against
lawless nobles were again to be enforced; and Corso Donati himself was
to be crushed in the collision of passions he had evoked but could not
control (1308). Though tenderly attached to members of his family, Dante
bore Corso a grudge as having been the chief agent in procuring his
exile--a grudge which years could do nothing to wipe out. He places in
the mouth of Forese Donati a prophecy of the great Baron's shameful
death, expressed in curt and scornful words, terrible from a
brother.[94] It is no figure of speech to say that Dante nursed revenge.

For some few years his hopes were set on Henry of Luxemburg, elected
Emperor in 1308. A Ghibeline, in the ordinary sense of the term, Dante
never was. We have in his _De Monarchia_ a full account of the
conception he had formed of the Empire--that of authority in temporal
affairs embodied in a just ruler, who, being already supreme, would be
delivered from all personal ambition; who should decree justice and be a
refuge for all that were oppressed. He was to be the captain of
Christian society and the guardian of civil right; as in another sphere
the Pope was to be the shepherd of souls and the guardian of the deposit
of Divine truth. In Dante's eyes the one great officer was as much God's
vicegerent as the other. While the most that a Ghibeline or a moderate
Guelf would concede was that there should be a division of power between
Pope and Emperor--the Ghibeline leaving it to the Emperor and the Guelf
to the Pope to define their provinces--Dante held, and in this he stood
almost alone among politicians, that they ought to be concerned with
wholly different kingdoms, and that Christendom was wronged by the
trespass of either upon the other's domain. An equal wrong was done by
the neglect by either of his duty, and both, as Dante judged, had been
shamefully neglecting it. For more than half a century no Emperor had
set foot in Italy; and since the Papal Court had under Clement V. been
removed to Avignon (1305), the Pope had ceased to be a free agent, owing
to his neighbourhood to France and the unscrupulous Philip.[95]

Dante trusted that the virtuous single-minded Henry VII. would prove a
monarch round whom all the best in Italy might gather to make him
Emperor in deed as well as in name. His judgment took the colour of his
hopes, for under the awful shadow of the Emperor he trusted to enter
Florence. Although no Ghibeline or Imperialist in the vulgar sense, he
constituted himself Henry's apologist and herald; and in letters
addressed to the 'wicked Florentines,' to the Emperor, and to the
Princes and Peoples of Italy, he blew as it were a trumpet-blast of
triumph over the Emperor's enemies and his own. Henry had crossed the
Alps, and was tarrying in the north of Italy, when Dante, with a keen
eye for where the key of the situation lay, sharpened by his own wishes,
urged him to lose no more time in reducing the Lombard cities to
obedience, but to descend on Florence, the rotten sheep which was
corrupting all the Italian flock. The men of Florence he bids prepare to
receive the just reward of their crimes.

The Florentines answered Dante's bitter invective and the Emperor's
milder promises by an unwearied opposition with the arms which their
increasing command of all that tends to soften life made them now less
willing to take up, and by the diplomacy in which they were supreme The
exiles were recalled, always excepting the more stubborn or dangerous;
and among these was reckoned Dante. Alliances were made on all hands, an
art which Henry was notably wanting in the trick of. Wherever he turned
he was met and checkmated by the Florentines, who, wise by experience,
were set on retaining control of their own affairs. After his coronation
at Rome (1312),[96] he marched northwards, and with his Pisan and
Aretine allies for six weeks laid fruitless siege to Florence. King
Robert of Naples, whose aid he had hoped to gain by means of a family
alliance, was joined to the league of Guelfs, and Henry passed away from
Florence to engage in an enterprise against the Southern Kingdom, a
design cut short by his death (1313). He was the last Emperor that ever
sought to take the part in Italian affairs which on Dante's theory
belonged to the Imperial office. Well-meaning but weak, he was not the
man to succeed in reducing to practice a scheme of government which had
broken down even in the strong hands of the two Fredericks, and ere the
Commonwealths of Italy had become each as powerful as a Northern
kingdom. To explain his failure, Dante finds that his descent into Italy
was unseasonable: he came too soon. Rather, it may be said, he came far
too late.[97]

When, on the death of Henry, Dante was disappointed in his hopes of a
true revival of the Empire, he devoted himself for a time to urging the
restoration of the Papal Court to Rome, so that Italy might at least not
be left without some centre of authority. In a letter addressed to the
Italian Cardinals, he besought them to replace Clement V., who died in
1314,[98] by an Italian Pope. Why should they, he asked, resign this
great office into Gascon hands? Why should Rome, the true centre of
Christendom, be left deserted and despised? His appeal was fruitless, as
indeed it could not fail to be with only six Italian Cardinals in a
College of twenty-four; and after a vacancy of two years the Gascon
Clement was succeeded by another Gascon. Although Dante's motives in
making this attempt were doubtless as purely patriotic as those which
inspired Catherine of Siena to similar action a century later, he met,
we may be sure, with but little sympathy from his former
fellow-citizens. They were intent upon the interests of Florence alone,
and even of these they may sometimes have taken a narrow view. His was
the wider patriotism of the Italian, and it was the whole Peninsula
that he longed to see delivered from French influence and once more
provided with a seat of authority in its midst, even if it were only
that of spiritual power. The Florentines for their part, desirous of
security against the incursions of the northern horde, were rather set
on retaining the goodwill of France than on enjoying the neighbourhood
of the Pope. In this they were guilty of no desertion of their
principles. Their Guelfism had never been more than a mode of minding
themselves.

For about three years (1313-1316) the most dangerous foe of Florence was
Uguccione de la Faggiuola, a partisan Ghibeline chief, sprung from the
mountain-land of Urbino, which lies between Tuscany and Romagna. He made
himself lord of Pisa and Lucca, and defeated the Florentines and their
allies in the great battle of Montecatini (1315). To him Dante is
believed to have attached himself.[99] It would be easy for the Republic
to form an exaggerated idea of the part which the exile had in shaping
the policy or contributing to the success of his patron; and we are not
surprised to find that, although Dante's fighting days were done, he was
after the defeat subjected to a third condemnation (November 1315). If
caught, he was to lose his head; and his sons, or some of them, were
threatened with the same fate. The terms of the sentence may again have
been more severe than the intentions of those who uttered it. However
this may be, an amnesty was passed in the course of the following year,
and Dante was urged to take advantage of it. He found the conditions of
pardon too humiliating. Like a malefactor he would require to walk,
taper in hand and a shameful mitre on his head, to the church of St
John, and there make an oblation for his crimes. It was not in this
fashion that in his more hopeful hours the exile had imagined his
restoration. If ever he trod again the pavement of his beautiful St
John's, it was to be proudly, as a patriot touching whom his country had
confessed her sins; or, with a poet's more bashful pride, to receive the
laurel crown beside the font in which he was baptized. But as he would
not enter his well beloved, well hated Florence on the terms imposed by
his enemies, so he never had the chance of entering it on his own. The
spirit in which he, as it were, turned from the open gates of his native
town is well expressed in a letter to a friend, who would seem to have
been a churchman who had tried to win his compliance with the terms of
the pardon. After thanking his correspondent for his kindly eagerness to
recover him, and referring to the submission required, he says:--'And is
it in this glorious fashion that Dante Alighieri, wearied with an almost
trilustral exile, is recalled to his country? Is this the desert of an
innocence known to all, and of laborious study which for long has kept
him asweat?... But, Father, this is no way for me to return to my
country by; though if by you or others one can be hit upon through which
the honour and fame of Dante will take no hurt, it shall be followed by
me with no tardy steps. If by none such Florence is to be entered, I
will never enter Florence. What then! Can I not, wherever I may be,
behold the sun and stars? Is not meditation upon the sweetness of truth
as free to me in one place as another? To enjoy this, no need to submit
myself ingloriously and with ignominy to the State and People of
Florence! And wherever I may be thrown, in any case I trust at least to
find daily bread.'

The cruelty and injustice of Florence to her greatest son have been the
subject of much eloquent blame. But, in justice to his contemporaries,
we must try to see Dante as they saw him, and bear in mind that the very
qualities fame makes so much of--his fervent temper and devotion to
great ideas--placed him out of the reach of common sympathy. Others
besides him had been banished from Florence, with as much or as little
reason, and had known the saltness of bread which has been begged, and
the steepness of strange stairs. The pains of banishment made them the
more eager to have it brought to a close. With Dante all that he
suffered went to swell the count of grievances for which a reckoning was
some day to be exacted. The art of returning was, as he himself knew
well, one he was slow to learn.[100] His noble obstinacy, which would
stoop to no loss of dignity or sacrifice of principle, must excite our
admiration; it also goes far to account for his difficulty in getting
back. We can even imagine that in Florence his refusal to abate one
tittle of what was due to him in the way of apology was, for a time, the
subject of wondering speculation to the citizens, ere they turned again
to their everyday affairs of politics and merchandise. Had they been
more used to deal with men in whom a great genius was allied to a
stubborn sense of honour, they would certainly have left less room in
their treatment of Dante for happier ages to cavil at.

How did the case stand? In the letter above quoted from, Dante says that
his innocence was known to all. As far as the charge of corruption in
his office-bearing went, his banishment--no one can doubt it for a
moment--was certainly unjust; and the political changes in Florence
since the death of Corso Donati had taken all the life out of the other
charges. But by his eager appeals to the Emperor to chastise the
Florentines he had raised fresh barriers against his return. The
governors of the Republic could not be expected to adopt his theory of
the Empire and share his views of the Imperial claims; and to them Dante
must have seemed as much guilty of disloyalty to the Commonwealth in
inviting the presence of Henry, as Corso Donati had been in Dante's eyes
for his share in bringing Charles of Valois to harry Florence. His
political writings since his exile--and all his writings were more or
less political--had been such as might well confirm or create an opinion
of him as a man difficult to live with, as one whose intellectual
arrogance had a ready organ in his unsparing tongue or pen. Rumour
would most willingly dwell upon and distort the features of his
character and conduct that separated him from the common herd. And to
add to all this, even after he had deserted the party of the Whites in
exile, and had become a party to himself, he found his friends and
patrons--for where else could he find them?--among the foes of Florence.


VI.

History never abhors a vacuum so much as when she has to deal with the
life of a great man, and for those who must have details of Dante's
career during the nineteen years which elapsed between his banishment
and his death, the industry of his biographers has exhausted every
available hint, while some of them press into their service much that
has only the remotest bearing on their hero. If even one-half of their
suppositions were adopted, we should be forced to the conclusion that
the _Comedy_ and all the other works of his exile were composed in the
intervals of a very busy life. We have his own word for this much,
(_Convito_ i. 3,) that since he was cast forth out of Florence--in which
he would 'fain rest his wearied soul and fulfil his appointed time'--he
had been 'a pilgrim, nay, even a mendicant,' in every quarter of
Italy,[101] and had 'been held cheap by many who, because of his fame,
had looked to find him come in another guise.' But he gives no journal
of his wanderings, and, as will have been observed, says no word of any
country but Italy. Keeping close to well-ascertained facts, it seems
established that in the earlier period of his exile he sojourned with
members of the great family of the Counts Guidi,[102] and that he also
found hospitality with the Malaspini,[103] lords of the Val di Magra,
between Genoa and Lucca. At a still earlier date (August 1306) he is
found witnessing a deed in Padua. It was most probably in the same year
that Dante found Giotto there, painting the walls of the Scrovegni
Chapel, and was courteously welcomed by the artist, and taken to his
house.[104] At some time of his life he studied at Bologna: John Villani
says, during his exile.[105] Of his supposed residence in Paris, though
it is highly probable, there is a want of proof; of a visit to England,
none at all that is worth a moment's consideration. Some of his
commentators and biographers seem to think he was so short-witted that
he must have been in a place before it could occur to him to name it in
his verse.

We have Dante's own word for it that he found his exile almost
intolerable. Besides the bitter resentment which he felt at the
injustice of it, he probably cherished the conviction that his career
had been cut short when he was on the point of acquiring great influence
in affairs. The illusion may have been his--one not uncommon among men
of a powerful imagination--that, given only due opportunity, he could
mould the active life of his time as easily as he moulded and fashioned
the creations of his fancy. It was, perhaps, owing to no fault of his
own that when a partial opportunity had offered itself, he failed to get
his views adopted in Florence; indeed, to judge from the kind of
employment in which he was more than once engaged for his patrons, he
must have been possessed of no little business tact. Yet, as when his
feelings were deeply concerned his words knew no restraint, so his hopes
would partake of the largeness of his genius. In the restored Empire,
which he was almost alone in longing for as he conceived of it, he may
have imagined for himself a place beside Henry like what in Frederick's
court had been filled by Pier delle Vigne--the man who held both keys to
the Emperor's heart, and opened and shut it as he would.[106]

Thus, as his exile ran on it would grow sadder with the accumulating
memories of hopes deferred and then destroyed, and of dreams which had
faded away in the light of a cheerless reality. But some consolations he
must have found even in the conditions of his exile. He had leisure for
meditation, and time enough to spend in that other world which was all
his own. With the miseries of a wanderer's life would come not a few of
its sweets--freedom from routine, and the intellectual stimulus supplied
by change of place. Here and there he would find society such as he
cared for--that of scholars, theologians, and men familiar with every
court and school of Christendom. And, beyond all, he would get access to
books that at home he might never have seen. It was no spare diet that
would serve his mind while he was making such ample calls on it for his
great work. As it proceeds we seem to detect a growing fulness of
knowledge, and it is by reason of the more learned treatment, as well as
the loftier theme of the Third Cantica, that so many readers, when once
well at sea in the _Paradiso_, recognise the force of the warning with
which it begins.[107]

What amount of intercourse he was able to maintain with Florence during
his wanderings is a matter of mere speculation, although of a more
interesting kind than that concerned with the chronology of his uneasy
travels. That he kept up at least some correspondence with his friends
is proved by the letter regarding the terms of his pardon. There is also
the well-known anecdote told by Boccaccio as to the discovery and
despatch to him of the opening Cantos of the _Inferno_--an anecdote we
may safely accept as founded on fact, although Boccaccio's informants
may have failed to note at the time what the manuscript consisted of,
and in the course of years may have magnified the importance of their
discovery. With his wife he would naturally communicate on subjects of
common interest--as, for instance, that of how best to save or recover
part of his property--and especially regarding the welfare of his sons,
of whom two are found to be with him when he acquires something like a
settlement in Verona.

It is quite credible that, as Boccaccio asserts, he would never after
his exile was once begun 'go to his wife or suffer her to join him where
he was;' although the statement is probably an extension of the fact
that she never did join him. In any case it is to make too large a use
of the words to find in them evidence, as has frequently been done, of
the unhappiness of all his married life, and of his utter estrangement
from Gemma during his banishment. The union--marriage of convenience
though it was--might be harmonious enough as long as things went
moderately well with the pair. Dante was never wealthy, but he seems to
have had his own house in Florence and small landed possessions in its
neighbourhood.[108] That before his banishment he was considerably in
debt appears to be ascertained;[109] but, without knowing the
circumstances in which he borrowed, it is impossible to be sure whether
he may not only have been making use of his credit in order to put out
part of his means to advantage in some of the numerous commercial
enterprises in which his neighbours were engaged. In any case his career
must have seemed full of promise till he was driven into banishment.
When that blow had fallen, it is easy to conceive how what if it was not
mutual affection had come to serve instead of it--esteem and
forbearance--would be changed into indifference with the lapse of months
and years of enforced separation, embittered and filled on both sides
with the mean cares of indigence, and, it may be, on Gemma's side with
the conviction that her husband had brought her with himself into
disgrace. If all that is said by Boccaccio and some of Dante's enemies
as to his temperament and behaviour were true, we could only hope that
Gemma's indifference was deep enough to save her from the pangs of
jealousy. And on the other hand, if we are to push suspicion to its
utmost length, we may find an allusion to his own experience in the
lines where Dante complains of how soon a widow forgets her
husband.[110] But this is all matter of the merest speculation. Gemma
is known to have been alive in 1314.[111] She brought up her children,
says Boccaccio, upon a trifling part of her husband's confiscated
estate, recovered on the plea that it was a portion of her dowry. There
may have been difficulties of a material kind, insuperable save to an
ardent love that was not theirs, in the way of Gemma's joining her
husband in any of his cities of refuge.

Complete evidence exists of Dante's having in his later years lived for
a longer or shorter time in the three cities of Lucca, Verona, and
Ravenna. In Purgatory he meets a shade from Lucca, in the murmur of
whose words he catches he 'knows not what of Gentucca;'[112] and when he
charges the Lucchese to speak plainly out, he is told that Lucca shall
yet be found pleasant by him because of a girl not yet grown to
womanhood. Uguccione, acting in the interest of Pisa, took possession of
Lucca in 1314, and Dante is supposed to have taken up his residence
there for some considerable time. What we may certainly infer from his
own words in the _Purgatorio_ is that they were written after a stay in
Lucca had been sweetened to him by the society of a lady named Gentucca.
He cannot well have found shelter there before the city was held by
Uguccione; and research has established that at least two ladies of the
uncommon name of Gentucca were resident there in 1314. From the whole
tone of his allusion--the mention of her very name and of her innocent
girlhood--we may gather that there was nothing in his liking for her of
which he had any reason to feel ashamed. In the _Inferno_ he had covered
the whole people of Lucca with his scorn.[113] By the time he got thus
far with the _Purgatorio_ his thoughts of the place were all softened by
his memory of one fair face--or shall we rather say, of one
compassionate and womanly soul? That Dante was more than susceptible to
feminine charms is coarsely asserted by Boccaccio.[114] But on such a
matter Boccaccio is a prejudiced witness, and, in the absence of
sufficient proof to the contrary, justice requires us to assume that the
tenor of Dante's life was not at variance with that of his writings. He
who was so severe a judge of others was not, as we can infer from more
than one passage of the _Comedy_, a lenient judge when his own failings
were concerned.[115] That his conduct never fell short of his standard
no one will venture to maintain. But what should have hindered him, in
his hours of weariness and when even his hold on the future seemed to
slacken, in lonely castle or strange town, to seek sympathy from some
fair woman who might remind him in something of Beatrice?[116]

When, in 1316, Uguccione was driven out of Lucca and Pisa, that great
partisan took military service with Can Grande. It has been disputed
whether Dante had earlier enjoyed the hospitality of the Scaligers, or
was indebted for his first reception in Verona to the good offices of
Uguccione. It is barely credible that by this time in his life he stood
in need of any one to answer for him in the court of Can Grande. His
fame as a political writer must have preceded him; and it was of a
character to commend him to the good graces of the great Imperialist. In
his _De Monarchia_ he had, by an exhaustive treatment of propositions
which now seem childish or else the mere commonplaces of everyday
political argument, established the right of the civil power to
independence of Church authority; and though to the Scaliger who aimed
at becoming Imperial lieutenant for all the North of Italy he might seem
needlessly tender to the spiritual lordship of the Holy Father, yet the
drift of his reasoning was all in favour of the Ghibeline position.[117]
Besides this he had written on the need of refining the dialects of
Italian, and reducing them to a language fit for general use in the
whole of the Peninsula; and this with a novelty of treatment and wealth
of illustration unequalled before or since in any first work on such a
subject.[118] And, what would recommend him still more to a youthful
prince of lofty taste, he was the poet of the 'sweet new style' of the
_Vita Nuova_, and of sonnets, ballads, and canzoni rich in language and
thought beyond the works of all previous poets in the vulgar tongues.
Add to this that the _Comedy_ was already written, and published up,
perhaps, to the close of the _Purgatorio_, and that all Italy was eager
to find who had a place, and what kind of place, in the strange new
world from which the veil was being withdrawn; and it is easy to imagine
that Dante's reception at Can Grande's court was rather that of a man
both admired and feared for his great genius, than that of a wandering
scholar and grumbling exile.

At what time Dante came to Verona, and for how long he stayed, we have
no means of fixing with certainty. He himself mentions being there in
1320,[119] and it is usually supposed that his residence covered three
years previous to that date; as also that it was shared by his two sons,
Piero and Jacopo. One of these was afterwards to find a settlement at
Verona in a high legal post. Except some frivolous legends, there is no
evidence that Dante met with anything but generous treatment from Can
Grande. A passage of the _Paradiso_, written either towards the close of
the poet's residence at Verona, or after he had left it, is full of a
praise of the great Scaliger so magnificent[120] as fully to make amends
for the contemptuous mention in the _Purgatorio_ of his father and
brother.[121] To Can Grande the _Paradiso_ was dedicated by the author
in a long epistle containing an exposition of how the first Canto of
that Cantica, and, by implication, the whole of the poem, is to be
interpreted. The letter is full of gratitude for favours already
received, and of expectation of others yet to come. From the terms of
the dedication it has been assumed that ere it was made the whole of the
_Paradiso_ was written, and that Dante praises the lord of Verona after
a long experience of his bounty.[122]

Whether owing to the restlessness of an exile, or to some prospect of
attaining a state of greater ease or of having the command of more
congenial society, we cannot tell; but from the splendid court of Can
Grande he moved down into Romagna, to Ravenna, the city which of all in
Italy would now be fixed upon by the traveller as the fittest place for
a man of genius, weighed down by infinite sorrows, to close his days in
and find a tomb. Some writers on the life of Dante will have it that in
Ravenna he spent the greater part of his exile, and that when he is
found elsewhere--in Lucca or Verona--he is only on a temporary absence
from his permanent home.[123] But this conclusion requires some facts to
be ignored, and others unduly dwelt on. In any case his patron there,
during at least the last year or two of his life, was Guido Novello of
Polenta, lord of Ravenna, the nephew of her who above all the persons of
the _Comedy_ lives in the hearts of its readers.

Bernardino, the brother of Francesca and uncle of Guido, had fought on
the side of Florence at the battle of Campaldino, and Dante may then
have become acquainted with him. The family had the reputation of being
moderate Guelfs; but ere this the exile, with his ripe experience of
men, had doubtless learned, while retaining intact his own opinions as
to what was the true theory of government, to set good-heartedness and
a noble aim in life above political orthodoxy. This Guido Novello--the
younger Guido--bears the reputation of having been well-informed, of
gentle manners, and fond of gathering around him men accomplished in
literature and the fine arts. On the death of Dante he made a formal
oration in honour of the poet. If his welcome of Dante was as cordial as
is generally supposed, and as there is no reason to doubt that it was,
it proved his magnanimity; for in the _Purgatorio_ a family specially
hostile to the Polentas had been mentioned with honour,[124] while that
to which his wife belonged had been lightly spoken of. How he got over
the condemnation of his kinswoman to Inferno--even under such gentle
conditions--it would be more difficult to understand were there not
reason to believe that ere Dante went to Ravenna it had come to be a
matter of pride in Italy for a family to have any of its members placed
anywhere in that other world of which Dante held the key.

It seems as if we might assume that the poet's last months or years were
soothed by the society of his daughter--the child whom he had named
after the object of his first and most enduring love.[125] Whether or
not he was acting as Ambassador for Guido to Venice when he caught his
last illness, it appears to be pretty well established that he was held
in honour by his patron and all around him.[126] For his hours of
meditation he had the solemn churches of Ravenna with their storied
walls,[127] and the still more solemn pine forest of Classis, by him
first annexed to the world of Romance.[128] For hours of relaxation,
when they came, he had neighbours who dabbled in letters and who could
at any rate sympathise with him in his love of study. He maintained
correspondence with poets and scholars in other cities. In at least one
instance this was conducted in the bitter fashion with which the
humanists of a century or two later were to make the world
familiar;[129] but with the Bolognese scholar, Giovanni del Virgilio, he
engaged in a good-humoured, half-bantering exchange of Latin pastoral
poems, through the artificial imagery of which there sometimes breaks a
natural thought, as when in answer to the pedant's counsel to renounce
the vulgar tongue and produce in Latin something that will entitle him
to receive the laurel crown in Bologna, he declares that if ever he is
crowned as a poet it will be on the banks of the Arno.

Most of the material for forming a judgment of how Dante stood affected
to the religious beliefs of his time is to be gathered from the
_Comedy_, and the place for considering it would rather be in an essay
on that work than in a sketch of his life which necessity compels to be
swift. A few words may however be here devoted to the subject, as it is
one with some bearing on the manner in which he would be regarded by
those around him, and through that on the tenor of his life. That Dante
conformed to Church observances, and, except with a few malevolent
critics, bore the reputation of a good Catholic, there can be no doubt.
It was as a politician and not as a heretic that he suffered
persecution; and when he died he was buried in great honour within the
Franciscan Church at Ravenna. Some few years after his death, it is
true, his _De Monarchia_ was burned as heretical by orders of the Papal
Legate in Lombardy, who would gladly, if he could, have had the bones of
the author exhumed to share the fate of his book. But all this was only
because the partisans of Lewis of Bavaria were making political capital
out of the treatise.

Attempts have been made to demonstrate that in spite of his outward
conformity Dante was an unbeliever at heart, and that the _Comedy_ is
devoted to the promulgation of a Ghibeline heresy--of which, we may be
sure, no Ghibeline ever heard--and to the overthrow of all that the
author professed most devoutly to believe.[130] Other critics of a more
sober temper in speculation would find in him a Catholic who held the
Catholic beliefs with the same slack grasp as the teaching of Luther was
held by Lessing or Goethe.[131] But this is surely to misread the
_Comedy_, which is steeped from beginning to end in a spirit of the
warmest faith in the great Christian doctrines. It was no mere
intellectual perception of these that Dante had--or professed to
have--for when in Paradise he has satisfied Saint Peter of his being
possessed of a just conception of the nature of faith, and is next asked
if, besides knowing what is the alloy of the coin and the weight of it,
he has it in his own purse, he answers boldly, 'Yea, and so shining and
round that of a surety it has the lawful stamp.'[132] And further on,
when required to declare in what he believes, nothing against the
fulness of his creed is to be inferred from the fact that he stops short
after pronouncing his belief in the existence of God and in the Trinity.
This article he gives as implying all the others; it is 'the spark which
spreads out into a vivid flame.'[133]

Yet if the inquiry were to be pushed further, and it were sought to find
how much of free thought he allowed himself in matters of religion,
Dante might be discovered to have reached his orthodox position by ways
hateful to the bigots who then took order for preserving the purity of
the faith. The office of the Pope he deeply revered, but the Papal
absolution avails nothing in his eyes compared with one tear of
heartfelt repentance.[134] It is not on the word of Pope or Council that
he rests his faith, but on the Scriptures, and on the evidences of the
truth of Christianity, freely examined and weighed.[135] Chief among
these evidences, it must however be noted, he esteemed the fact of the
existence of the Church as he found it;[136] and in his inquiries he
accepted as guides the Scholastic Doctors on whose reasonings the Church
had set its seal of approbation. It was a foregone conclusion he reached
by stages of his own. Yet that he sympathised at least as much with the
honest search for truth as with the arrogant profession of orthodoxy, is
shown by his treatment of heretics. He could not condemn severely such
as erred only because their reason would not consent to rest like his in
the prevalent dogmatic system; and so we find that he makes heresy
consist less in intellectual error than in beliefs that tend to vitiate
conduct, or to cause schism in societies divinely constituted.[137] For
his own part, orthodox although he was, or believed himself to be--which
is all that needs to be contended for,--in no sense was he
priest-ridden. It was liberty that he went seeking on his great
journey;[138] and he gives no hint that it is to be gained by the
observance of forms or in submission to sacerdotal authority. He knows
it is in his reach only when he has been crowned, and mitred too, lord
of himself[139]--subject to Him alone of whom even Popes were
servants.[140]

Although in what were to prove his last months Dante might amuse himself
with the composition of learned trifles, and in the society and
correspondence of men who along with him, if on lines apart from his,
were preparing the way for the revival of classical studies, the best
part of his mind, then as for long before, was devoted to the _Comedy_;
and he was counting on the suffrages of a wider audience than courts and
universities could supply.

Here there is no room to treat at length of that work, to which when we
turn our thoughts all else he wrote--though that was enough to secure
him fame--seems to fall into the background as if unworthy of his
genius. What can hardly be passed over in silence is that in the
_Comedy_, once it was begun, he must have found a refuge for his soul
from all petty cares, and a shield against all adverse fortune. We must
search its pages, and not the meagre records of his biographers, to find
what was the life he lived during the years of his exile; for, in a
sense, it contains the true journal of his thoughts, of his hopes, and
of his sorrows. The plan was laid wide enough to embrace the
observations he made of nature and of man, the fruits of his painful
studies, and the intelligence he gathered from those experienced in
travel, politics, and war. It was not only his imagination and artistic
skill that were spent upon the poem: he gave his life to it. The future
reward he knew was sure--an immortal fame; but he hoped for a nearer
profit on his venture. Florence might at last relent, if not because of
his innocence and at the spectacle of his inconsolable exile, at least
on hearing the rumour of his genius borne to her from every corner of
Italy:--

  If e'er it comes that this my sacred Lay,
    To which both Heaven and Earth have set their hand--
    Through which these many years I waste away--
  Shall quell the cruelty that keeps me banned
    From the fair fold where I, a lamb, was found
    Hostile to wolves who 'gainst it violence planned;
  With other fleece and voice of other sound,
    Poet will I return, and at the font
    Where I was christened be with laurel crowned.[141]

But with the completion of the _Comedy_ Dante's life too came to a
close. He died at Ravenna in the month of September 1321.