Ann's Army


"I won't!" cried Ann; "I won't sweep the floor. It is beneath my
dignity."

"Some one must sweep it," replied Ann's younger sister, Salye; "else we
shall soon be wading in dust. And you are the eldest, and the head of the
family."

"I'm Queen of Oogaboo," said Ann, proudly. "But," she added with a sigh,
"my kingdom is the smallest and the poorest in all the Land of Oz."

This was quite true. Away up in the mountains, in a far corner of the
beautiful fairyland of Oz, lies a small valley which is named Oogaboo,
and in this valley lived a few people who were usually happy and
contented and never cared to wander over the mountain pass into the more
settled parts of the land. They knew that all of Oz, including their own
territory, was ruled by a beautiful Princess named Ozma, who lived in the
splendid Emerald City; yet the simple folk of Oogaboo never visited Ozma.
They had a royal family of their own--not especially to rule over them,
but just as a matter of pride. Ozma permitted the various parts of her
country to have their Kings and Queens and Emperors and the like, but all
were ruled over by the lovely girl Queen of the Emerald City.

The King of Oogaboo used to be a man named Jol Jemkiph Soforth, who for
many years did all the drudgery of deciding disputes and telling his
people when to plant cabbages and pickle onions. But the King's wife had
a sharp tongue and small respect for the King, her husband; therefore one
night King Jol crept over the pass into the Land of Oz and disappeared
from Oogaboo for good and all. The Queen waited a few years for him to
return and then started in search of him, leaving her eldest daughter,
Ann Soforth, to act as Queen.

Now, Ann had not forgotten when her birthday came, for that meant a party
and feasting and dancing, but she had quite forgotten how many years
the birthdays marked. In a land where people live always, this is not
considered a cause for regret, so we may justly say that Queen Ann of
Oogaboo was old enough to make jelly--and let it go at that.

But she didn't make jelly, or do any more of the housework than she could
help. She was an ambitious woman and constantly resented the fact that
her kingdom was so tiny and her people so stupid and unenterprising.
Often she wondered what had become of her father and mother, out beyond
the pass, in the wonderful Land of Oz, and the fact that they did not
return to Oogaboo led Ann to suspect that they had found a better place
to live. So, when Salye refused to sweep the floor of the living room in
the palace, and Ann would not sweep it, either, she said to her sister:

"I'm going away. This absurd Kingdom of Oogaboo tires me."

"Go, if you want to," answered Salye; "but you are very foolish to leave
this place."

"Why?" asked Ann.

"Because in the Land of Oz, which is Ozma's country, you will be a
nobody, while here you are a Queen."

"Oh, yes! Queen over eighteen men, twenty-seven women and forty-four
children!" returned Ann bitterly.

"Well, there are certainly more people than that in the great Land of
Oz," laughed Salye. "Why don't you raise an army and conquer them, and
be Queen of all Oz?" she asked, trying to taunt Ann and so to anger her.
Then she made a face at her sister and went into the back yard to swing
in the hammock.

Her jeering words, however, had given Queen Ann an idea. She reflected
that Oz was reported to be a peaceful country and Ozma a mere girl who
ruled with gentleness to all and was obeyed because her people loved her.
Even in Oogaboo the story was told that Ozma's sole army consisted of
twenty-seven fine officers, who wore beautiful uniforms but carried no
weapons, because there was no one to fight. Once there had been a private
soldier, besides the officers, but Ozma had made him a Captain-General
and taken away his gun for fear it might accidentally hurt some one.

The more Ann thought about the matter the more she was convinced it would
be easy to conquer the Land of Oz and set herself up as Ruler in Ozma's
place, if she but had an Army to do it with. Afterward she could go
out into the world and conquer other lands, and then perhaps she could
find a way to the moon, and conquer that. She had a warlike spirit that
preferred trouble to idleness.

It all depended on an Army, Ann decided. She carefully counted in her
mind all the men of her kingdom. Yes; there were exactly eighteen of
them, all told. That would not make a very big Army, but by surprising
Ozma's unarmed officers her men might easily subdue them. "Gentle people
are always afraid of those that bluster," Ann told herself. "I don't wish
to shed any blood, for that would shock my nerves and I might faint; but
if we threaten and flash our weapons I am sure the people of Oz will
fall upon their knees before me and surrender."

This argument, which she repeated to herself more than once, finally
determined the Queen of Oogaboo to undertake the audacious venture.

"Whatever happens," she reflected, "can make me no more unhappy than
my staying shut up in this miserable valley and sweeping floors and
quarreling with Sister Salye; so I will venture all, and win what I may."

That very day she started out to organize her Army.

The first man she came to was Jo Apple, so called because he had an apple
orchard.

"Jo," said Ann, "I am going to conquer the world, and I want you to join
my Army."

"Don't ask me to do such a fool thing, for I must politely refuse Your
Majesty," said Jo Apple.

"I have no intention of asking you. I shall command you, as Queen of
Oogaboo, to join," said Ann.

"In that case, I suppose I must obey," the man remarked, in a sad voice.
"But I pray you to consider that I am a very important citizen, and for
that reason am entitled to an office of high rank."

"You shall be a General," promised Ann.

"With gold epaulets and a sword?" he asked.

"Of course," said the Queen.

Then she went to the next man, whose name was Jo Bunn, as he owned an
orchard where graham-buns and wheat-buns, in great variety, both hot and
cold, grew on the trees.

"Jo," said Ann, "I am going to conquer the world, and I command you to
join my Army."

"Impossible!" he exclaimed. "The bun crop has to be picked."

"Let your wife and children do the picking," said Ann.

"But I'm a man of great importance, Your Majesty," he protested.

"For that reason you shall be one of my Generals, and wear a cocked hat
with gold braid, and curl your mustaches and clank a long sword," she
promised.

So he consented, although sorely against his will, and the Queen walked
on to the next cottage. Here lived Jo Cone, so called because the trees
in his orchard bore crops of excellent ice-cream cones.

"Jo," said Ann, "I am going to conquer the world, and you must join my
Army."

"Excuse me, please," said Jo Cone. "I am a bad fighter. My good wife
conquered me years ago, for she can fight better than I. Take her, Your
Majesty, instead of me, and I'll bless you for the favor."

"This must be an army of men--fierce, ferocious warriors," declared Ann,
looking sternly upon the mild little man.

"And you will leave my wife here in Oogaboo?" he asked.

"Yes; and make you a General."

"I'll go," said Jo Cone, and Ann went on to the cottage of Jo Clock, who
had an orchard of clock-trees. This man at first insisted that he would
not join the army, but Queen Ann's promise to make him a General finally
won his consent.

"How many Generals are there in your army?" he asked.

"Four, so far," replied Ann.

"And how big will the army be?" was his next question.

"I intend to make every one of the eighteen men in Oogaboo join it," she
said.

"Then four Generals are enough," announced Jo Clock. "I advise you to
make the rest of them Colonels."

Ann tried to follow his advice. The next four men she visited--who were
Jo Plum, Jo Egg, Jo Banjo and Jo Cheese, named after the trees in their
orchards--she made Colonels of her Army; but the fifth one, Jo Nails,
said Colonels and Generals were getting to be altogether too common in
the Army of Oogaboo and he preferred to be a Major. So Jo Nails, Jo
Cake, Jo Ham and Jo Stockings were all four made Majors, while the next
four--Jo Sandwich, Jo Padlocks, Jo Sundae and Jo Buttons--were appointed
Captains of the Army.

But now Queen Ann was in a quandary. There remained but two other men in
all Oogaboo, and if she made these two Lieutenants, while there were four
Captains, four Majors, four Colonels and four Generals, there was likely
to be jealousy in her army, and perhaps mutiny and desertions.

One of these men, however, was Jo Candy, and he would not go at all.
No promises could tempt him, nor could threats move him. He said he
must remain at home to harvest his crop of jackson-balls, lemon-drops,
bonbons and chocolate-creams. Also he had large fields of crackerjack and
buttered pop corn to be mowed and threshed, and he was determined not to
disappoint the children of Oogaboo by going away to conquer the world and
so let the candy crop spoil.

Finding Jo Candy so obstinate, Queen Ann let him have his own way and
continued her journey to the house of the eighteenth and last man in
Oogaboo, who was a young fellow named Jo Files. This Files had twelve
trees which bore steel files of various sorts; but also he had nine
book-trees, on which grew a choice selection of story-books. In case you
have never seen books growing upon trees, I will explain that those in
Jo Files' orchard were enclosed in broad green husks which, when fully
ripe, turned to a deep red color. Then the books were picked and husked
and were ready to read. If they were picked too soon, the stories were
found to be confused and uninteresting and the spelling bad. However,
if allowed to ripen perfectly, the stories were fine reading and the
spelling and grammar excellent.

[Illustration]

Files freely gave his books to all who wanted them, but the people
of Oogaboo cared little for books and so he had to read most of them
himself, before they spoiled. For, as you probably know, as soon as
the books were read the words disappeared and the leaves withered and
faded--which is the worst fault of all books which grow upon trees.

When Queen Ann spoke to this young man Files, who was both intelligent
and ambitious, he said he thought it would be great fun to conquer the
world. But he called her attention to the fact that he was far superior
to the other men of her army. Therefore, he would not be one of her
Generals or Colonels or Majors or Captains, but claimed the honor of
being sole Private.

Ann did not like this idea at all.

"I hate to have a Private Soldier in my army," she said; "they're so
common. I am told that Princess Ozma once had a private soldier, but she
made him her Captain-General, which is good evidence that the private was
unnecessary."

"Ozma's army doesn't fight," returned Files; "but your army must fight
like fury in order to conquer the world. I have read in my books that it
is always the private soldiers who do the fighting, for no officer is
ever brave enough to face the foe. Also, it stands to reason that your
officers must have some one to command and to issue their orders to;
therefore I'll be the one. I long to slash and slay the enemy and become
a hero. Then, when we return to Oogaboo, I'll take all the marbles away
from the children and melt them up and make a marble statue of myself for
all to look upon and admire."

Ann was much pleased with Private Files. He seemed indeed to be such a
warrior as she needed in her enterprise, and her hopes of success took a
sudden bound when Files told her he knew where a gun-tree grew and would
go there at once and pick the ripest and biggest musket the tree bore.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]


                                CHAPTER 2

                             Out of Oogaboo


Three days later the Grand Army of Oogaboo assembled in the square in
front of the royal palace. The sixteen officers were attired in gorgeous
uniforms and carried sharp, glittering swords. The Private had picked
his gun and, although it was not a very big weapon, Files tried to look
fierce and succeeded so well that all his commanding officers were
secretly afraid of him.

The women were there, protesting that Queen Ann Soforth had no right to
take their husbands and fathers from them; but Ann commanded them to keep
silent, and that was the hardest order to obey they had ever received.

[Illustration: For--ward March!]

The Queen appeared before her Army dressed in an imposing uniform of
green, covered with gold braid. She wore a green soldier-cap with a
purple plume in it and looked so royal and dignified that everyone in
Oogaboo except the Army was glad she was going. The Army was sorry she
was not going alone.

"Form ranks!" she cried in her shrill voice.

Salye leaned out of the palace window and laughed.

"I believe your Army can run better than it can fight," she observed.

"Of course," replied General Bunn, proudly. "We're not looking for
trouble, you know, but for plunder. The more plunder and the less
fighting we get, the better we shall like our work."

"For my part," said Files, "I prefer war and carnage to anything. The
only way to become a hero is to conquer, and the story-books all say that
the easiest way to conquer is to fight."

"That's the idea, my brave man!" agreed Ann. "To fight is to conquer
and to conquer is to secure plunder and to secure plunder is to become
a hero. With such noble determination to back me, the world is mine!
Good-bye, Salye. When we return we shall be rich and famous. Come,
Generals; let us march."

At this the Generals straightened up and threw out their chests. Then
they swung their glittering swords in rapid circles and cried to the
Colonels:

"For--ward March!"

Then the Colonels shouted to the Majors: "For--ward March!" and the
Majors yelled to the Captains: "For--ward March!" and the Captains
screamed to the Private:

"For--ward March!"

So Files shouldered his gun and began to march, and all the officers
followed after him. Queen Ann came last of all, rejoicing in her noble
army and wondering why she had not decided long ago to conquer the world.

In this order the procession marched out of Oogaboo and took the narrow
mountain pass which led into the lovely Fairyland of Oz.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]


                                CHAPTER 3

                      Magic Mystifies the Marchers


Princess Ozma was all unaware that the Army of Oogaboo, led by their
ambitious Queen, was determined to conquer her Kingdom. The beautiful
girl Ruler of Oz was busy with the welfare of her subjects and had no
time to think of Ann Soforth and her disloyal plans. But there was one
who constantly guarded the peace and happiness of the Land of Oz and this
was the Official Sorceress of the Kingdom, Glinda the Good.

In her magnificent castle, which stands far north of the Emerald City
where Ozma holds her court, Glinda owns a wonderful magic Record Book, in
which is printed every event that takes place anywhere, just as soon as
it happens.

The smallest things and the biggest things are all recorded in this book.
If a child stamps its foot in anger, Glinda reads about it; if a city
burns down, Glinda finds the fact noted in her book.

The Sorceress always reads her Record Book every day, and so it was she
knew that Ann Soforth, Queen of Oogaboo, had foolishly assembled an army
of sixteen officers and one private soldier, with which she intended to
invade and conquer the Land of Oz.

There was no danger but that Ozma, supported by the magic arts of Glinda
the Good and the powerful Wizard of Oz--both her firm friends--could
easily defeat a far more imposing army than Ann's; but it would be a
shame to have the peace of Oz interrupted by any sort of quarreling or
fighting. So Glinda did not even mention the matter to Ozma, or to anyone
else. She merely went into a great chamber of her castle, known as the
Magic Room, where she performed a magical ceremony which caused the
mountain pass that led from Oogaboo to make several turns and twists. The
result was that when Ann and her army came to the end of the pass they
were not in the Land of Oz at all, but in an adjoining territory that was
quite distinct from Ozma's domain and separated from Oz by an invisible
barrier.

As the Oogaboo people emerged into this country, the pass they had
traversed disappeared behind them and it was not likely they would
ever find their way back into the valley of Oogaboo. They were greatly
puzzled, indeed, by their surroundings and did not know which way to go.
None of them had ever visited Oz, so it took them some time to discover
they were not in Oz at all, but in an unknown country.

"Never mind," said Ann, trying to conceal her disappointment; "we have
started out to conquer the world, and here is part of it. In time, as we
pursue our victorious journey, we will doubtless come to Oz; but, until
we get there, we may as well conquer whatever land we find ourselves in."

"Have we conquered this place, Your Majesty?" anxiously inquired Major
Cake.

"Most certainly," said Ann. "We have met no people, as yet, but when we
do, we will inform them that they are our slaves."

"And afterward we will plunder them of all their possessions," added
General Apple.

"They may not possess anything," objected Private Files; "but I hope they
will fight us, just the same. A peaceful conquest wouldn't be any fun at
all."

"Don't worry," said the Queen. "_We_ can fight, whether our foes do or
not; and perhaps we would find it more comfortable to have the enemy
surrender promptly."

It was a barren country and not very pleasant to travel in. Moreover,
there was little for them to eat, and as the officers became hungry they
became fretful. Many would have deserted had they been able to find their
way home, but as the Oogaboo people were now hopelessly lost in a strange
country they considered it more safe to keep together than to separate.

Queen Ann's temper, never very agreeable, became sharp and irritable as
she and her army tramped over the rocky roads without encountering either
people or plunder. She scolded her officers until they became surly, and
a few of them were disloyal enough to ask her to hold her tongue. Others
began to reproach her for leading them into difficulties and in the space
of three unhappy days every man was mourning for his orchard in the
pretty valley of Oogaboo.

Files, however, proved a different sort. The more difficulties he
encountered the more cheerful he became, and the sighs of the officers
were answered by the merry whistle of the Private. His pleasant
disposition did much to encourage Queen Ann and before long she consulted
the Private Soldier more often than she did his superiors.

It was on the third day of their pilgrimage that they encountered their
first adventure. Toward evening the sky was suddenly darkened and Major
Nails exclaimed:

"A fog is coming toward us."

"I do not think it is a fog," replied Files, looking with interest at the
approaching cloud. "It seems to me more like the breath of a Rak."

"What is a Rak?" asked Ann, looking about fearfully.

"A terrible beast with a horrible appetite," answered the soldier,
growing a little paler than usual. "I have never seen a Rak, to be sure,
but I have read of them in the story-books that grew in my orchard, and
if this is indeed one of those fearful monsters, we are not likely to
conquer the world."

Hearing this, the officers became quite worried and gathered closer about
their soldier.

"What is the thing like?" asked one.

"The only picture of a Rak that I ever saw in a book was rather blurred,"
said Files, "because the book was not quite ripe when it was picked. But
the creature can fly in the air and run like a deer and swim like a fish.
Inside its body is a glowing furnace of fire, and the Rak breathes in air
and breathes out smoke, which darkens the sky for miles around, wherever
it goes. It is bigger than a hundred men and feeds on any living thing."

The officers now began to groan and to tremble, but Files tried to cheer
them, saying:

"It may not be a Rak, after all, that we see approaching us, and you must
not forget that we people of Oogaboo, which is part of the fairyland of
Oz, cannot be killed."

"Nevertheless," said Captain Buttons, "if the Rak catches us, and chews
us up into small pieces, and swallows us--what will happen then?"

"Then each small piece will still be alive," declared Files.

"I cannot see how that would help us," wailed Colonel Banjo. "A hamburger
steak is a hamburger steak, whether it is alive or not!"

"I tell you, this may not be a Rak," persisted Files. "We will know, when
the cloud gets nearer, whether it is the breath of a Rak or not. If it
has no smell at all, it is probably a fog; but if it has an odor of salt
and pepper, it is a Rak and we must prepare for a desperate fight."

They all eyed the dark cloud fearfully. Before long it reached the
frightened group and began to envelop them. Every nose sniffed the
cloud--and every one detected in it the odor of salt and pepper.

"The Rak!" shouted Private Files, and with a howl of despair the sixteen
officers fell to the ground, writhing and moaning in anguish. Queen Ann
sat down upon a rock and faced the cloud more bravely, although her heart
was beating fast. As for Files, he calmly loaded his gun and stood ready
to fight the foe, as a soldier should.

They were now in absolute darkness, for the cloud which covered the sky
and the setting sun was black as ink. Then through the gloom appeared two
round, glowing balls of red, and Files at once decided these must be the
monster's eyes.

He raised his gun, took aim and fired.

There were several bullets in the gun, all gathered from an excellent
bullet-tree in Oogaboo, and they were big and hard. They flew toward the
monster and struck it, and with a wild, weird cry the Rak came fluttering
down and its huge body fell plump upon the forms of the sixteen officers,
who thereupon screamed louder than before.

"Badness me!" moaned the Rak. "See what you've done with that dangerous
gun of yours!"

"I can't see," replied Files, "for the cloud formed by your breath
darkens my sight!"

"Don't tell me it was an accident," continued the Rak, reproachfully, as
it still flapped its wings in a helpless manner. "Don't claim you didn't
know the gun was loaded, I beg of you!"

"I don't intend to," replied Files. "Did the bullets hurt you very badly?"

"One has broken my jaw, so that I can't open my mouth. You will notice
that my voice sounds rather harsh and husky, because I have to talk with
my teeth set close together. Another bullet broke my left wing, so that I
can't fly; and still another broke my right leg, so that I can't walk. It
was the most careless shot I ever heard of!"

"Can't you manage to lift your body off from my commanding officers?"
inquired Files. "From their cries I'm afraid your great weight is
crushing them."

[Illustration]

"I hope it is," growled the Rak. "I want to crush them, if possible, for
I have a bad disposition. If only I could open my mouth, I'd eat all of
you, although my appetite is poorly this warm weather."

With this the Rak began to roll its immense body sidewise, so as to crush
the officers more easily; but in doing this it rolled completely off from
them and the entire sixteen scrambled to their feet and made off as fast
as they could run.

Private Files could not see them go but he knew from the sound of their
voices that they had escaped, so he ceased to worry about them.

"Pardon me if I now bid you good-bye," he said to the Rak. "The parting
is caused by our desire to continue our journey. If you die, do not blame
me, for I was obliged to shoot you as a matter of self-protection."

"I shall not die," answered the monster, "for I bear a charmed life. But
I beg you not to leave me!"

"Why not?" asked Files.

"Because my broken jaw will heal in about an hour, and then I shall be
able to eat you. My wing will heal in a day and my leg will heal in a
week, when I shall be as well as ever. Having shot me, and so caused me
all this annoyance, it is only fair and just that you remain here and
allow me to eat you as soon as I can open my jaws."

"I beg to differ with you," returned the soldier firmly. "I have made an
engagement with Queen Ann of Oogaboo to help her conquer the world, and
I cannot break my word for the sake of being eaten by a Rak."

"Oh; that's different," said the monster. "If you've an engagement, don't
let me detain you."

So Files felt around in the dark and grasped the hand of the trembling
Queen, whom he led away from the flapping, sighing Rak. They stumbled
over the stones for a way but presently began to see dimly the path ahead
of them, as they got farther and farther away from the dreadful spot
where the wounded monster lay.

By and by they reached a little hill and could see the last rays of the
sun flooding a pretty valley beyond, for now they had passed beyond the
cloudy breath of the Rak. Here were huddled the sixteen officers, still
frightened and panting from their run. They had halted only because it
was impossible for them to run any farther.

Queen Ann gave them a severe scolding for their cowardice, at the same
time praising Files for his courage.

"We are wiser than he, however," muttered General Clock, "for by running
away we are now able to assist Your Majesty in conquering the world;
whereas, had Files been eaten by the Rak, he would have deserted your
Army."

After a brief rest they descended into the valley, and as soon as they
were out of sight of the Rak the spirits of the entire party rose
quickly. Just at dusk they came to a brook, on the banks of which Queen
Ann commanded them to make camp for the night.

Each officer carried in his pocket a tiny white tent. This, when placed
upon the ground, quickly grew in size until it was large enough to
permit the owner to enter it and sleep within its canvas walls. Files
was obliged to carry a knapsack, in which was not only his own tent but
an elaborate pavilion for Queen Ann, besides a bed and chair and a magic
table. This table, when set upon the ground in Ann's pavilion, became of
large size, and in a drawer of the table was contained the Queen's supply
of extra clothing, her manicure and toilet articles and other necessary
things. The royal bed was the only one in the camp, the officers and
private sleeping in hammocks attached to their tent poles.

There was also in the knapsack a flag bearing the royal emblem of
Oogaboo, and this flag Files flew upon its staff every night, to show
that the country they were in had been conquered by the Queen of Oogaboo.
So far, no one but themselves had seen the flag, but Ann was pleased to
see it flutter in the breeze and considered herself already a famous
conqueror.




[Illustration]


                                CHAPTER 4

                        Betsy Braves the Billows


The waves dashed and the lightning flashed and the thunder rolled and
the ship struck a rock. Betsy Bobbin was running across the deck and the
shock sent her flying through the air until she fell with a splash into
the dark blue water. The same shock caught Hank, a thin little, sad-faced
mule, and tumbled him also into the sea, far from the ship's side.

When Betsy came up, gasping for breath because the wet plunge had
surprised her, she reached out in the dark and grabbed a bunch of hair.
At first she thought it was the end of a rope, but presently she heard a
dismal "Hee-haw!" and knew she was holding fast to the end of Hank's tail.

Suddenly the sea was lighted up by a vivid glare. The ship, now in the
far distance, caught fire, blew up and sank beneath the waves.

Betsy shuddered at the sight, but just then her eye caught a mass of
wreckage floating near her and she let go the mule's tail and seized the
rude raft, pulling herself up so that she rode upon it in safety. Hank
also saw the raft and swam to it, but he was so clumsy he never would
have been able to climb upon it had not Betsy helped him to get aboard.

They had to crowd close together, for their support was only a
hatch-cover torn from the ship's deck; but it floated them fairly well
and both the girl and the mule knew it would keep them from drowning.

The storm was not over, by any means, when the ship went down. Blinding
bolts of lightning shot from cloud to cloud and the clamor of deep
thunderclaps echoed far over the sea. The waves tossed the little raft
here and there as a child tosses a rubber ball and Betsy had a solemn
feeling that for hundreds of watery miles in every direction there was no
living thing besides herself and the small donkey.

Perhaps Hank had the same thought, for he gently rubbed his nose against
the frightened girl and said "Hee-haw!" in his softest voice, as if to
comfort her.

"You'll protect me, Hank dear, won't you?" she cried helplessly, and the
mule said "Hee-haw!" again, in tones that meant a promise.

On board the ship, during the days that preceded the wreck, when the
sea was calm, Betsy and Hank had become good friends; so, while the
girl might have preferred a more powerful protector in this dreadful
emergency, she felt that the mule would do all in a mule's power to guard
her safety.

All night they floated, and when the storm had worn itself out and
passed away with a few distant growls, and the waves had grown smaller
and easier to ride, Betsy stretched herself out on the wet raft and fell
asleep.

Hank did not sleep a wink. Perhaps he felt it his duty to guard Betsy.
Anyhow, he crouched on the raft beside the tired sleeping girl and
watched patiently until the first light of dawn swept over the sea.

The light wakened Betsy Bobbin. She sat up, rubbed her eyes and stared
across the water.

"Oh, Hank; there's land ahead!" she exclaimed.

"Hee-haw!" answered Hank in his plaintive voice.

The raft was floating swiftly toward a very beautiful country and as
they drew near Betsy could see banks of lovely flowers showing brightly
between leafy trees. But no people were to be seen at all.




[Illustration]


                                CHAPTER 5

                     The Roses Repulse the Refugees


Gently the raft grated on the sandy beach. Then Betsy easily waded
ashore, the mule following closely behind her. The sun was now shining
and the air was warm and laden with the fragrance of roses.

"I'd like some breakfast, Hank," remarked the girl, feeling more cheerful
now that she was on dry land; "but we can't eat the flowers, although
they do smell mighty good."

"Hee-haw!" replied Hank and trotted up a little pathway to the top of the
bank.

Betsy followed and from the eminence looked around her. A little way
off stood a splendid big greenhouse, its thousands of crystal panes
glittering in the sunlight.

"There ought to be people somewhere 'round," observed Betsy thoughtfully;
"gardeners, or somebody. Let's go and see, Hank. I'm getting hungrier
ev'ry minute."

So they walked toward the great greenhouse and came to its entrance
without meeting with anyone at all. A door stood ajar, so Hank went in
first, thinking if there was any danger he could back out and warn his
companion. But Betsy was close at his heels and the moment she entered
was lost in amazement at the wonderful sight she saw.

The greenhouse was filled with magnificent rosebushes, all growing in
big pots. On the central stem of each bush bloomed a splendid Rose,
gorgeously colored and deliciously fragrant, and in the center of each
Rose was the face of a lovely girl.

As Betsy and Hank entered, the heads of the Roses were drooping and
their eyelids were closed in slumber; but the mule was so amazed that he
uttered a loud "Hee-haw!" and at the sound of his harsh voice the rose
leaves fluttered, the Roses raised their heads and a hundred startled
eyes were instantly fixed upon the intruders.

"I--I beg your pardon!" stammered Betsy, blushing and confused.

"O-o-o-h!" cried the Roses, in a sort of sighing chorus; and one of them
added: "What a horrid noise!"

"Why, that was only Hank," said Betsy, and as if to prove the truth of
her words the mule uttered another loud "Hee-haw!"

At this all the Roses turned on their stems as far as they were able and
trembled as if some one were shaking their bushes. A dainty Moss Rose
gasped: "Dear me! How dreadfully dreadful!"

"It isn't dreadful at all," said Betsy, somewhat indignant. "When you get
used to Hank's voice it will put you to sleep."

The Roses now looked at the mule less fearfully and one of them asked:

"Is that savage beast named Hank?"

"Yes; Hank's my comrade, faithful and true," answered the girl, twining
her arms around the little mule's neck and hugging him tight. "Aren't
you, Hank?"

Hank could only say in reply: "Hee-haw!" and at his bray the Roses
shivered again.

"Please go away!" begged one. "Can't you see you're frightening us out of
a week's growth?"

"Go away!" echoed Betsy. "Why, we've no place to go. We've just been
wrecked."

"Wrecked?" asked the Roses in a surprised chorus.

"Yes; we were on a big ship and the storm came and wrecked it," explained
the girl. "But Hank and I caught hold of a raft and floated ashore to
this place, and--we're tired and hungry. What country _is_ this, please?"

[Illustration]

"This is the Rose Kingdom," replied the Moss Rose, haughtily, "and it is
devoted to the culture of the rarest and fairest Roses grown."

"I believe it," said Betsy, admiring the pretty blossoms.

"But only Roses are allowed here," continued a delicate Tea Rose, bending
her brows in a frown; "therefore you must go away before the Royal
Gardener finds you and casts you back into the sea."

"Oh! Is there a Royal Gardener, then?" inquired Betsy.

"To be sure."

"And is he a Rose, also?"

"Of course not; he's a man--a wonderful man," was the reply.

"Well, I'm not afraid of a man," declared the girl, much relieved, and
even as she spoke the Royal Gardener popped into the greenhouse--a
spading fork in one hand and a watering pot in the other.

He was a funny little man, dressed in a rose-colored costume, with
ribbons at his knees and elbows, and a bunch of ribbons in his hair. His
eyes were small and twinkling, his nose sharp and his face puckered and
deeply lined.

"O-ho!" he exclaimed, astonished to find strangers in his greenhouse,
and when Hank gave a loud bray the Gardener threw the watering pot over
the mule's head and danced around with his fork, in such agitation that
presently he fell over the handle of the implement and sprawled at full
length upon the ground.

Betsy laughed and pulled the watering pot off from Hank's head. The
little mule was angry at the treatment he had received and backed toward
the Gardener threateningly.

"Look out for his heels!" called Betsy warningly and the Gardener
scrambled to his feet and hastily hid behind the Roses.

"You are breaking the Law!" he shouted, sticking out his head to glare at
the girl and the mule.

"What Law?" asked Betsy.

"The Law of the Rose Kingdom. No strangers are allowed in these domains."

"Not when they're shipwrecked?" she inquired.

"The Law doesn't except shipwrecks," replied the Royal Gardener, and he
was about to say more when suddenly there was a crash of glass and a man
came tumbling through the roof of the greenhouse and fell plump to the
ground.




[Illustration]


                                CHAPTER 6

                     Shaggy Seeks his Stray Brother


This sudden arrival was a queer looking man, dressed all in garments
so shaggy that Betsy at first thought he must be some animal. But the
stranger ended his fall in a sitting position and then the girl saw it
was really a man. He held an apple in his hand, which he had evidently
been eating when he fell, and so little was he jarred or flustered by the
accident that he continued to munch this apple as he calmly looked around
him.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Betsy, approaching him. "Who _are_ you, and
where did you come from?"

"Me? Oh, I'm Shaggy Man," said he, taking another bite of the apple.
"Just dropped in for a short call. Excuse my seeming haste."

"Why, I s'pose you couldn't help the haste," said Betsy.

"No. I climbed an apple tree, outside; branch gave way and--here I am."

As he spoke the Shaggy Man finished his apple, gave the core to Hank--who
ate it greedily--and then stood up to bow politely to Betsy and the Roses.

The Royal Gardener had been frightened nearly into fits by the crash of
glass and the fall of the shaggy stranger into the bower of Roses, but
now he peeped out from behind a bush and cried in his squeaky voice:

"You're breaking the Law! You're breaking the Law!"

Shaggy stared at him solemnly.

"Is the glass the Law in this country?" he asked.

"Breaking the glass is breaking the Law," squeaked the Gardener, angrily.
"Also, to intrude in any part of the Rose Kingdom is breaking the Law."

"How do you know?" asked Shaggy.

"Why, it's printed in a book," said the Gardener, coming forward and
taking a small book from his pocket. "Page thirteen. Here it is: 'If
any stranger enters the Rose Kingdom he shall at once be condemned
by the Ruler and put to death.' So you see, strangers," he continued
triumphantly, "it's death for you all and your time has come!"

But just here Hank interposed. He had been stealthily backing toward the
Royal Gardener, whom he disliked, and now the mule's heels shot out and
struck the little man in the middle. He doubled up like the letter "U"
and flew out of the door so swiftly--never touching the ground--that he
was gone before Betsy had time to wink.

But the mule's attack frightened the girl.

"Come," she whispered, approaching the Shaggy Man and taking his hand;
"let's go somewhere else. They'll surely kill us if we stay here!"

"Don't worry, my dear," replied Shaggy, patting the child's head. "I'm
not afraid of anything, so long as I have the Love Magnet."

"The Love Magnet! Why, what is that?" asked Betsy.

"It's a charming little enchantment that wins the heart of everyone who
looks upon it," was the reply. "The Love Magnet used to hang over the
gateway to the Emerald City, in the Land of Oz; but when I started on
this journey our beloved Ruler, Ozma of Oz, allowed me to take it with
me."

"Oh!" cried Betsy, staring hard at him; "are you really from the
wonderful Land of Oz?"

"Yes. Ever been there, my dear?"

"No; but I've heard about it. And do you know Princess Ozma?"

"Very well indeed."

"And--and Princess Dorothy?"

"Dorothy's an old chum of mine," declared Shaggy.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Betsy. "And why did you ever leave such a beautiful
land as Oz?"

"On an errand," said Shaggy, looking sad and solemn. "I'm trying to find
my dear little brother."

"Oh! Is he lost?" questioned Betsy, feeling very sorry for the poor man.

"Been lost these ten years," replied Shaggy, taking out a handkerchief
and wiping a tear from his eye. "I didn't know it until lately, when I
saw it recorded in the magic Record Book of the Sorceress Glinda, in the
Land of Oz. So now I'm trying to find him."

"Where was he lost?" asked the girl sympathetically.

"Back in Colorado, where I used to live before I went to Oz. Brother was
a miner, and dug gold out of a mine. One day he went into his mine and
never came out. They searched for him, but he was not there. Disappeared
entirely," Shaggy ended miserably.

"For goodness sake! What do you s'pose became of him?" she asked.

"There is only one explanation," replied Shaggy, taking another apple
from his pocket and eating it to relieve his misery. "The Nome King
probably got him."

"The Nome King! Who is he?"

"Why, he's sometimes called the Metal Monarch, and his name is Ruggedo.
Lives in some underground cavern. Claims to own all the metals hidden in
the earth. Don't ask me why."

"Why?"

"'Cause I don't know. But this Ruggedo gets wild with anger if anyone
digs gold out of the earth, and my private opinion is that he captured
brother and carried him off to his underground kingdom. No--don't ask me
why. I see you're dying to ask me why. But I don't know."

"But--dear me!--in that case you will never find your lost brother!"
exclaimed the girl.

"Maybe not; but it's my duty to try," answered Shaggy. "I've wandered so
far without finding him, but that only proves he is not where I've been
looking. What I seek now is the hidden passage to the underground cavern
of the terrible Metal Monarch."

"Well," said Betsy doubtfully, "it strikes me that if you ever manage to
get there the Metal Monarch will make you, too, his prisoner."

"Nonsense!" answered Shaggy, carelessly. "You mustn't forget the Love
Magnet."

"What about it?" she asked.

"When the fierce Metal Monarch sees the Love Magnet, he will love me
dearly and do anything I ask."

"It must be wonderful," said Betsy, with awe.

"It is," the man assured her. "Shall I show it to you?"

"Oh, do!" she cried; so Shaggy searched in his shaggy pocket and drew out
a small silver magnet, shaped like a horseshoe.

The moment Betsy saw it she began to like the Shaggy Man better than
before. Hank also saw the Magnet and crept up to Shaggy to rub his head
lovingly against the man's knee.

But they were interrupted by the Royal Gardener, who stuck his head into
the greenhouse and shouted angrily:

"You are all condemned to death! Your only chance to escape is to leave
here instantly."

This startled little Betsy, but the Shaggy Man merely waved the Magnet
toward the Gardener, who, seeing it, rushed forward and threw himself at
Shaggy's feet, murmuring in honeyed words:

"Oh, you lovely, lovely man! How fond I am of you! Every shag and bobtail
that decorates you is dear to me--all I have is yours! But for goodness'
sake get out of here before you die the death."

"I'm not going to die," declared Shaggy Man.

"You must. It's the Law," exclaimed the Gardener, beginning to weep real
tears. "It breaks my heart to tell you this bad news, but the Law says
that all strangers must be condemned by the Ruler to die the death."

"No Ruler has condemned us yet," said Betsy.

"Of course not," added Shaggy. "We haven't even seen the Ruler of the
Rose Kingdom."

"Well, to tell the truth," said the Gardener, in a perplexed tone of
voice, "we haven't any real Ruler, just now. You see, all our Rulers grow
on bushes in the Royal Gardens, and the last one we had got mildewed and
withered before his time. So we had to plant him, and at this time there
is no one growing on the Royal Bushes who is ripe enough to pick."

"How do you know?" asked Betsy.

"Why, I'm the Royal Gardener. Plenty of royalties are growing, I admit;
but just now they are all green. Until one ripens, I am supposed to rule
the Rose Kingdom myself, and see that its Laws are obeyed. Therefore,
much as I love you, Shaggy, I must put you to death."

"Wait a minute," pleaded Betsy. "I'd like to see those Royal Gardens
before I die."

"So would I," added Shaggy Man. "Take us there, Gardener."

"Oh, I can't do that," objected the Gardener. But Shaggy again showed him
the Love Magnet and after one glance at it the Gardener could no longer
resist.

He led Shaggy, Betsy and Hank to the end of the great greenhouse and
carefully unlocked a small door. Passing through this they came into the
splendid Royal Garden of the Rose Kingdom.

It was all surrounded by a tall hedge and within the enclosure grew
several enormous rosebushes having thick green leaves of the texture of
velvet. Upon these bushes grew the members of the Royal Family of the
Rose Kingdom--men, women and children in all stages of maturity. They all
seemed to have a light green hue, as if unripe or not fully developed,
their flesh and clothing being alike green. They stood perfectly lifeless
upon their branches, which swayed softly in the breeze, and their
wide-open eyes stared straight ahead, unseeing and unintelligent.

While examining these curious growing people, Betsy passed behind a big
central bush and at once uttered an exclamation of surprise and pleasure.
For there, blooming in perfect color and shape, stood a Royal Princess,
whose beauty was amazing.

"Why, she's ripe!" cried Betsy, pushing aside some of the broad leaves to
observe her more clearly.

"Well, perhaps so," admitted the Gardener, who had come to the girl's
side; "but she's a girl, and so we can't use her for a Ruler."

"No, indeed!" came a chorus of soft voices, and looking around Betsy
discovered that all the Roses had followed them from the greenhouse and
were now grouped before the entrance.

"You see," explained the Gardener, "the subjects of Rose Kingdom don't
want a girl Ruler. They want a King."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

"A King! We want a King!" repeated the chorus of Roses.

"Isn't she Royal?" inquired Shaggy, admiring the lovely Princess.

"Of course, for she grows on a Royal Bush. This Princess is named Ozga,
as she is a distant cousin of Ozma of Oz; and, were she but a man, we
would joyfully hail her as our Ruler."

The Gardener then turned away to talk with his Roses and Betsy whispered
to her companion: "Let's pick her, Shaggy."

"All right," said he. "If she's royal, she has the right to rule this
Kingdom, and if we pick her she will surely protect us and prevent our
being hurt, or driven away."

So Betsy and Shaggy each took an arm of the beautiful Rose Princess and a
little twist of her feet set her free of the branch upon which she grew.
Very gracefully she stepped down from the bush to the ground, where she
bowed low to Betsy and Shaggy and said in a delightfully sweet voice: "I
thank you."

But at the sound of these words the Gardener and the Roses turned and
discovered that the Princess had been picked, and was now alive. Over
every face flashed an expression of resentment and anger, and one of the
Roses cried aloud:

"Audacious mortals! What have you done?"

[Illustration]

"Picked a Princess for you, that's all," replied Betsy, cheerfully.

"But we won't have her! We want a King!" exclaimed a Jacque Rose, and
another added with a voice of scorn: "No girl shall rule over us!"

The newly-picked Princess looked from one to another of her rebellious
subjects in astonishment. A grieved look came over her exquisite features.

"Have I no welcome here, pretty subjects?" she asked gently. "Have I not
come from my Royal Bush to be your Ruler?"

"You were picked by mortals, without our consent," replied the Moss Rose,
coldly; "so we refuse to allow you to rule us."

"Turn her out, Gardener, with the others!" cried the Tea Rose.

"Just a second, please!" called Shaggy, taking the Love Magnet from his
pocket. "I guess this will win their love, Princess. Here--take it in
your hand and let the roses see it."

Princess Ozga took the Magnet and held it poised before the eyes of her
subjects; but the Roses regarded it with calm disdain.

"Why, what's the matter?" demanded Shaggy in surprise. "The Magnet never
failed to work before!"

"I know," said Betsy, nodding her head wisely. "These Roses have no
hearts."

"That's it," agreed the Gardener. "They're pretty, and sweet, and alive;
but still they are Roses. Their stems have thorns, but no hearts."

The Princess sighed and handed the Magnet to the Shaggy Man.

"What shall I do?" she asked sorrowfully.

"Turn her out, Gardener, with the others!" commanded the Roses. "We will
have no Ruler until a man-rose--a King--is ripe enough to pick."

"Very well," said the Gardener meekly. "You must excuse me, my dear
Shaggy, for opposing your wishes, but you and the others, including Ozga,
must get out of Rose Kingdom immediately, if not before."

"Don't you love me, Gardy?" asked Shaggy, carelessly displaying the
Magnet.

"I do. I dote on thee!" answered the Gardener earnestly; "but no true man
will neglect his duty for the sake of love. My duty is to drive you out,
so--out you go!"

With this he seized a garden fork and began jabbing it at the strangers,
in order to force them to leave. Hank the mule was not afraid of the fork
and when he got his heels near to the Gardener the man fell back to avoid
a kick.

But now the Roses crowded around the outcasts and it was soon discovered
that beneath their draperies of green leaves were many sharp thorns which
were more dangerous than Hank's heels. Neither Betsy nor Ozga nor Shaggy
nor the mule cared to brave those thorns and when they pressed away from
them they found themselves slowly driven through the garden door into
the greenhouse. From there they were forced out at the entrance and so
through the territory of the flower-strewn Rose Kingdom, which was not of
very great extent.

The Rose Princess was sobbing bitterly; Betsy was indignant and angry;
Hank uttered defiant "Hee-haws" and the Shaggy Man whistled softly to
himself.

The boundary of the Rose Kingdom was a deep gulf, but there was a
drawbridge in one place and this the Royal Gardener let down until the
outcasts had passed over it. Then he drew it up again and returned with
his Roses to the greenhouse, leaving the four queerly assorted comrades
to wander into the bleak and unknown country that lay beyond.

"I don't mind, much," remarked Shaggy, as he led the way over the stony,
barren ground. "I've got to search for my long-lost little brother,
anyhow, so it won't matter where I go."

"Hank and I will help you find your brother," said Betsy in her most
cheerful voice. "I'm so far away from home now that I don't s'pose I'll
ever find my way back; and, to tell the truth, it's more fun traveling
around and having adventures than sticking at home. Don't you think so,
Hank?"

[Illustration]

"Hee-haw!" said Hank, and the Shaggy Man thanked them both.

"For my part," said Princess Ozga of Roseland, with a gentle sigh, "I
must remain forever exiled from my Kingdom. So I, too, will be glad to
help the Shaggy Man find his lost brother."

"That's very kind of you, ma'am," said Shaggy. "But unless I can find the
underground cavern of Ruggedo,[A] the Metal Monarch, I shall never find
poor brother."

[Footnote A: This King was formerly named "Roquat," but after he drank of
the "Waters of Oblivion" he forgot his own name and had to take another.]

"Doesn't anyone know where it is?" inquired Betsy.

"_Some_ one must know, of course," was Shaggy's reply. "But we are not
the ones. The only way to succeed is for us to keep going until we find a
person who can direct us to Ruggedo's cavern."

"We may find it ourselves, without any help," suggested Betsy. "Who
knows?"

"No one knows that, except the person who's writing this story," said
Shaggy. "But we won't find anything--not even supper--unless we travel
on. Here's a path. Let's take it and see where it leads to."




[Illustration]


                                CHAPTER 7

                       Polychrome's Pitiful Plight


The Rain King got too much water in his basin and spilled some over the
brim. That made it rain in a certain part of the country--a real hard
shower, for a time--and sent the Rainbow scampering to the place to show
the gorgeous colors of his glorious bow as soon as the mist of rain had
passed and the sky was clear.

The coming of the Rainbow is always a joyous event to earth folk, yet few
have ever seen it close by. Usually the Rainbow is so far distant that
you can observe its splendid hues but dimly, and that is why we seldom
catch sight of the dancing Daughters of the Rainbow.

In the barren country where the rain had just fallen there appeared to
be no human beings at all; but the Rainbow appeared, just the same, and
dancing gayly upon its arch were the Rainbow's Daughters, led by the
fairylike Polychrome, who is so dainty and beautiful that no girl has
ever quite equalled her in loveliness.

Polychrome was in a merry mood and danced down the arch of the bow to
the ground, daring her sisters to follow her. Laughing and gleeful, they
also touched the ground with their twinkling feet; but all the Daughters
of the Rainbow knew that this was a dangerous pastime, so they quickly
climbed upon their bow again.

All but Polychrome. Though the sweetest and merriest of them all, she
was likewise the most reckless. Moreover, it was an unusual sensation
to pat the cold, damp earth with her rosy toes. Before she realized it
the bow had lifted and disappeared in the billowy blue sky, and here was
Polychrome standing helpless upon a rock, her gauzy draperies floating
about her like brilliant cobwebs and not a soul--fairy or mortal--to help
her regain her lost bow!

"Dear me!" she exclaimed, a frown passing across her pretty face, "I'm
caught again. This is the second time my carelessness has left me on
earth while my sisters returned to our Sky Palaces. The first time I
enjoyed some pleasant adventures, but this is a lonely, forsaken country
and I shall be very unhappy until my Rainbow comes again and I can climb
aboard. Let me think what is best to be done."

She crouched low upon the flat rock, drew her draperies about her and
bowed her head.

It was in this position that Betsy Bobbin spied Polychrome as she came
along the stony path, followed by Hank, the Princess and Shaggy. At once
the girl ran up to the radiant Daughter of the Rainbow and exclaimed:

"Oh, what a lovely, lovely creature!"

Polychrome raised her golden head. There were tears in her blue eyes.

"I'm the most miserable girl in the whole world!" she sobbed.

The others gathered around her.

"Tell us your troubles, pretty one," urged the Princess.

"I--I've lost my bow!" wailed Polychrome.

"Take me, my dear," said Shaggy Man in a sympathetic tone, thinking she
meant "beau" instead of "bow."

"I don't want you!" cried Polychrome, stamping her foot imperiously; "I
want my _Rain_bow."

"Oh; that's different," said Shaggy. "But try to forget it. When I was
young I used to cry for the Rainbow myself, but I couldn't have it. Looks
as if _you_ couldn't have it, either; so please don't cry."

Polychrome looked at him reproachfully.

"I don't like you," she said.

"No?" replied Shaggy, drawing the Love Magnet from his pocket; "not a
little bit?--just a wee speck of a like?"

"Yes, yes!" said Polychrome, clasping her hands in ecstasy as she gazed
at the enchanted talisman; "I love you, Shaggy Man!"

"Of course you do," said he calmly; "but I don't take any credit for
it. It's the Love Magnet's powerful charm. But you seem quite alone and
friendless, little Rainbow. Don't you want to join our party until you
find your father and sisters again?"

"Where are you going?" she asked.

"We don't just know that," said Betsy, taking her hand; "but we're trying
to find Shaggy's long-lost brother, who has been captured by the terrible
Metal Monarch. Won't you come with us, and help us?"

Polychrome looked from one to another of the queer party of travelers and
a bewitching smile suddenly lighted her face.

"A donkey, a mortal maid, a Rose Princess and a Shaggy Man!" she
exclaimed. "Surely you need help, if you intend to face Ruggedo."

"Do you know him, then?" inquired Betsy.

"No, indeed. Ruggedo's caverns are beneath the earth's surface, where no
Rainbow can ever penetrate. But I've heard of the Metal Monarch. He is
also called the Nome King, you know, and he has made trouble for a good
many people--mortals and fairies--in his time," said Polychrome.

"Do you fear him, then?" asked the Princess, anxiously.

"No one can harm a Daughter of the Rainbow," said Polychrome proudly.
"I'm a sky fairy."

"Then," said Betsy, quickly, "you will be able to tell us the way to
Ruggedo's cavern."

"No," returned Polychrome, shaking her head, "that is one thing I cannot
do. But I will gladly go with you and help you search for the place."

This promise delighted all the wanderers and after the Shaggy Man had
found the path again they began moving along it in a more happy mood.
The Rainbow's Daughter danced lightly over the rocky trail, no longer
sad, but with her beautiful features wreathed in smiles. Shaggy came
next, walking steadily and now and then supporting the Rose Princess, who
followed him. Betsy and Hank brought up the rear, and if she tired with
walking the girl got upon Hank's back and let the stout little donkey
carry her for awhile.

At nightfall they came to some trees that grew beside a tiny brook and
here they made camp and rested until morning. Then away they tramped,
finding berries and fruits here and there which satisfied the hunger of
Betsy, Shaggy and Hank, so that they were well content with their lot.

It surprised Betsy to see the Rose Princess partake of their food, for
she considered her a fairy; but when she mentioned this to Polychrome,
the Rainbow's Daughter explained that when Ozga was driven out of her
Rose Kingdom she ceased to be a fairy and would never again be more than
a mere mortal. Polychrome, however, was a fairy wherever she happened to
be, and if she sipped a few dewdrops by moonlight for refreshment no one
ever saw her do it.

As they continued their wandering journey, direction meant very little
to them, for they were hopelessly lost in this strange country. Shaggy
said it would be best to go toward the mountains, as the natural entrance
to Ruggedo's underground cavern was likely to be hidden in some rocky,
deserted place; but mountains seemed all around them except in the one
direction that they had come from, which led to the Rose Kingdom and the
sea. Therefore it mattered little which way they traveled.

By and by they espied a faint trail that looked like a path and after
following this for some time they reached a cross-roads. Here were many
paths, leading in various directions, and there was a signpost so old
that there were now no words upon the sign. At one side was an old well,
with a chain windlass for drawing water, yet there was no house or other
building anywhere in sight.

While the party halted, puzzled which way to proceed, the mule approached
the well and tried to look into it.

"He's thirsty," said Betsy.

"It's a dry well," remarked Shaggy. "Probably there has been no water in
it for many years. But, come; let us decide which way to travel."

No one seemed able to decide that. They sat down in a group and tried to
consider which road might be the best to take. Hank, however, could not
keep away from the well and finally he reared up on his hind legs, got
his head over the edge and uttered a loud "Hee-haw!" Betsy watched her
animal friend curiously.

"I wonder if he sees anything down there?" she said.

At this, Shaggy rose and went over to the well to investigate, and Betsy
went with him. The Princess and Polychrome, who had become fast friends,
linked arms and sauntered down one of the roads, to find an easy path.

"Really," said Shaggy, "there does seem to be something at the bottom of
this old well."

"Can't we pull it up, and see what it is?" asked the girl.

There was no bucket at the end of the windlass chain, but there was a
big hook that at one time was used to hold a bucket. Shaggy let down
this hook, dragged it around on the bottom and then pulled it up. An old
hoopskirt came with it, and Betsy laughed and threw it away. The thing
frightened Hank, who had never seen a hoopskirt before, and he kept a
good distance away from it.

Several other objects the Shaggy Man captured with the hook and drew up,
but none of these was important.

"This well seems to have been the dump for all the old rubbish in the
country," he said, letting down the hook once more. "I guess I've
captured everything now. No--the hook has caught again. Help me, Betsy!
Whatever this thing is, it's heavy."

She ran up and helped him turn the windlass and after much effort a
confused mass of copper came in sight.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Shaggy. "Here is a surprise, indeed!"

"What is it?" inquired Betsy, clinging to the windlass and panting for
breath.

For answer the Shaggy Man grasped the bundle of copper and dumped it
upon the ground, free of the well. Then he turned it over with his foot,
spread it out, and to Betsy's astonishment the thing proved to be a
copper man.

"Just as I thought," said Shaggy, looking hard at the object. "But unless
there are two copper men in the world this is the most astonishing thing
I ever came across."

At this moment the Rainbow's Daughter and the Rose Princess approached
them, and Polychrome said:

"What have you found, Shaggy One?"

"Either an old friend, or a stranger," he replied.

"Oh, here's a sign on his back!" cried Betsy, who had knelt down to
examine the man. "Dear me; how funny! Listen to this."

Then she read the following words, engraved upon the copper plates of the
man's body:

                            SMITH & TINKER'S

        Patent Double-Action, Extra-Responsive,
                     Thought-Creating, Perfect-Talking

                            _MECHANICAL MAN_

          Fitted with our Special Clockwork Attachment.
        Thinks, Speaks, Acts, and Does Everything but Live.

"Isn't he wonderful!" exclaimed the Princess.

"Yes; but here's more," said Betsy, reading from another engraved plate:

                          DIRECTIONS FOR USING:

      For THINKING:--Wind the Clockwork Man under his left arm,
          (marked No. 1).

      For SPEAKING:--Wind the Clockwork Man under his right arm,
          (marked No. 2).

      For WALKING and ACTION:--Wind Clockwork Man in the middle of his
          back, (marked No. 3).

        N. B.--This Mechanism is guaranteed to work perfectly for a
      thousand years.

"If he's guaranteed for a thousand years," said Polychrome, "he ought to
work yet."

"Of course," replied Shaggy. "Let's wind him up."

In order to do this they were obliged to set the copper man upon his
feet, in an upright position, and this was no easy task. He was inclined
to topple over, and had to be propped again and again. The girls assisted
Shaggy, and at last Tik-Tok seemed to be balanced and stood alone upon
his broad feet.

"Yes," said Shaggy, looking at the copper man carefully, "this must be,
indeed, my old friend Tik-Tok, whom I left ticking merrily in the Land of
Oz. But how he came to this lonely place, and got into that old well, is
surely a mystery."

"If we wind him, perhaps he will tell us," suggested Betsy. "Here's the
key, hanging to a hook on his back. What part of him shall I wind up
first?"

"His thoughts, of course," said Polychrome, "for it requires thought to
speak or move intelligently."

So Betsy wound him under his left arm, and at once little flashes of
light began to show in the top of his head, which was proof that he had
begun to think.

"Now, then," said Shaggy, "wind up his phonograph."

"What's that?" she asked.

"Why, his talking-machine. His thoughts may be interesting, but they
don't tell us anything."

So Betsy wound the copper man under his right arm, and then from the
interior of his copper body came in jerky tones the words: "Ma-ny thanks!"

"Hurrah!" cried Shaggy, joyfully, and he slapped Tik-Tok upon the back
in such a hearty manner that the copper man lost his balance and tumbled
to the ground in a heap. But the clockwork that enabled him to speak had
been wound up and he kept saying: "Pick-me-up! Pick-me-up! Pick-me-up!"
until they had again raised him and balanced him upon his feet, when he
added politely: "Ma-ny thanks!"

"He won't be self-supporting until we wind up his action," remarked
Shaggy; so Betsy wound it, as tight as she could--for the key turned
rather hard--and then Tik-Tok lifted his feet, marched around in a circle
and ended by stopping before the group and making them all a low bow.

"How in the world did you happen to be in that well, when I left you safe
in Oz?" inquired Shaggy.

"It is a long sto-ry," replied Tik-Tok, "but I'll tell it in a few words.
Af-ter you had gone in search of your broth-er, Oz-ma saw you wan-der-ing
in strange lands when-ev-er she looked in her mag-ic pic-ture, and she
also saw your broth-er in the Nome King's cav-ern; so she sent me to tell
you where to find your broth-er and told me to help you if I could. The
Sor-cer-ess, Glin-da the Good, trans-port-ed me to this place in the wink
of an eye; but here I met the Nome King himself--old Rug-ge-do, who is
called in these parts the Met-al Mon-arch. Rug-ge-do knew what I had come
for, and he was so an-gry that he threw me down the well. Af-ter my works
ran down I was help-less un-til you came a-long and pulled me out a-gain.
Ma-ny thanks."

"This is, indeed, good news," said Shaggy. "I suspected that my brother
was the prisoner of Ruggedo; but now I know it. Tell us, Tik-Tok, how
shall we get to the Nome King's underground cavern?"

"The best way is to walk," said Tik-Tok. "We might crawl, or jump, or
roll o-ver and o-ver un-til we get there; but the best way is to walk."

"I know; but which road shall we take?"

"My ma-chin-er-y is-n't made to tell that," replied Tik-Tok.

"There is more than one entrance to the underground cavern," said
Polychrome; "but old Ruggedo has cleverly concealed every opening, so
that earth dwellers can not intrude in his domain. If we find our way
underground at all, it will be by chance."

"Then," said Betsy, "let us select any road, haphazard, and see where it
leads us."

"That seems sensible," declared the Princess. "It may require a lot of
time for us to find Ruggedo, but we have more time than anything else."

"If you keep me wound up," said Tik-Tok, "I will last a thou-sand years."

"Then the only question to decide is which way to go," added Shaggy,
looking first at one road and then at another.

But while they stood hesitating, a peculiar sound reached their ears--a
sound like the tramping of many feet.

"What's coming?" cried Betsy; and then she ran to the left-hand road and
glanced along the path. "Why, it's an army!" she exclaimed. "What shall
we do, hide or run?"

"Stand still," commanded Shaggy. "I'm not afraid of an army. If they
prove to be friendly, they can help us; if they are enemies, I'll show
them the Love Magnet."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]


                                CHAPTER 8

                      Tik-Tok Tackles a Tough Task


While Shaggy and his companions stood huddled in a group at one side, the
Army of Oogaboo was approaching along the pathway, the tramp of their
feet being now and then accompanied by a dismal groan as one of the
officers stepped on a sharp stone or knocked his funnybone against his
neighbor's sword-handle.

Then out from among the trees marched Private Files, bearing the banner
of Oogaboo, which fluttered from a long pole. This pole he stuck in the
ground just in front of the well and then he cried in a loud voice:

"I hereby conquer this territory in the name of Queen Ann Soforth of
Oogaboo, and all the inhabitants of the land I proclaim her slaves!"

Some of the officers now stuck their heads out of the bushes and asked:

"Is the coast clear, Private Files?"

"There is no coast here," was the reply, "but all's well."

"I hope there's water in it," said General Cone, mustering courage to
advance to the well; but just then he caught a glimpse of Tik-Tok and
Shaggy and at once fell upon his knees, trembling and frightened, and
cried out:

"Mercy, kind enemies! Mercy! Spare us, and we will be your slaves
forever!"

The other officers, who had now advanced into the clearing, likewise fell
upon their knees and begged for mercy.

Files turned around and, seeing the strangers for the first time,
examined them with much curiosity. Then, discovering that three of the
party were girls, he lifted his cap and made a polite bow.

"What's all this?" demanded a harsh voice, as Queen Ann reached the place
and beheld her kneeling army.

"Permit us to introduce ourselves," replied Shaggy, stepping forward.
"This is Tik-Tok, the Clockwork Man--who works better than some meat
people. And here is Princess Ozga of Roseland, just now unfortunately
exiled from her Kingdom of Roses. I next present Polychrome, a sky fairy,
who lost her Bow by an accident and can't find her way home. The small
girl here is Betsy Bobbin, from some unknown earthly paradise called
Oklahoma, and with her you see Mr. Hank, a mule with a long tail and a
short temper."

"Puh!" said Ann, scornfully; "a pretty lot of vagabonds you are, indeed;
all lost or strayed, I suppose, and not worth a Queen's plundering. I'm
sorry I've conquered you."

"But you haven't conquered us yet," called Betsy indignantly.

"No," agreed Files, "that is a fact. But if my officers will kindly
command me to conquer you, I will do so at once, after which we can stop
arguing and converse more at our ease."

The officers had by this time risen from their knees and brushed the dust
from their trousers. To them the enemy did not look very fierce, so the
Generals and Colonels and Majors and Captains gained courage to face them
and began strutting in their most haughty manner.

"You must understand," said Ann, "that I am the Queen of Oogaboo, and
this is my invincible Army. We are busy conquering the world, and since
you seem to be a part of the world, and are obstructing our journey, it
is necessary for us to conquer you--unworthy though you may be of such
high honor."

"That's all right," replied Shaggy. "Conquer us as often as you like. We
don't mind."

"But we won't be anybody's slaves," added Betsy, positively.

[Illustration]

"We'll see about that," retorted the Queen, angrily. "Advance, Private
Files, and bind the enemy hand and foot!"

But Private Files looked at pretty Betsy and fascinating Polychrome and
the beautiful Rose Princess and shook his head.

"It would be impolite, and I won't do it," he asserted.

"You must!" cried Ann. "It is your duty to obey orders."

"I haven't received any orders from my officers," objected the Private.

But the Generals now shouted: "Forward, and bind the prisoners!" and the
Colonels and Majors and Captains repeated the command, yelling it as loud
as they could.

All this noise annoyed Hank, who had been eyeing the Army of Oogaboo with
strong disfavor. The mule now dashed forward and began backing upon the
officers and kicking fierce and dangerous heels at them. The attack was
so sudden that the officers scattered like dust in a whirlwind, dropping
their swords as they ran and trying to seek refuge behind the trees and
bushes.

Betsy laughed joyously at the comical rout of the "noble army," and
Polychrome danced with glee. But Ann was furious at this ignoble defeat
of her gallant forces by one small mule.

"Private Files, I command you to do your duty!" she cried again, and
then she herself ducked to escape the mule's heels--for Hank made no
distinction in favor of a lady who was an open enemy. Betsy grabbed her
champion by the forelock, however, and so held him fast, and when the
officers saw that the mule was restrained from further attacks they crept
fearfully back and picked up their discarded swords.

"Private Files, seize and bind these prisoners!" screamed the Queen.

"No," said Files, throwing down his gun and removing the knapsack which
was strapped to his back, "I resign my position as the Army of Oogaboo. I
enlisted to fight the enemy and become a hero, but if you want some one
to bind harmless girls you will have to hire another Private."

Then he walked over to the others and shook hands with Shaggy and Tik-Tok.

"Treason!" shrieked Ann, and all the officers echoed her cry.

"Nonsense," said Files. "I've the right to resign if I want to."

"Indeed you haven't!" retorted the Queen. "If you resign it will break
up my Army, and then I cannot conquer the world." She now turned to
the officers and said: "I must ask you to do me a favor. I know it is
undignified in officers to fight, but unless you immediately capture
Private Files and force him to obey my orders there will be no plunder
for any of us. Also it is likely you will all suffer the pangs of
hunger, and when we meet a powerful foe you are liable to be captured and
made slaves."

The prospect of this awful fate so frightened the officers that they drew
their swords and rushed upon Files, who stood beside Shaggy, in a truly
ferocious manner. The next instant, however, they halted and again fell
upon their knees; for there, before them, was the glistening Love Magnet,
held in the hand of the smiling Shaggy Man, and the sight of this magic
talisman at once won the heart of every Oogabooite. Even Ann saw the Love
Magnet, and forgetting all enmity and anger threw herself upon Shaggy and
embraced him lovingly.

Quite disconcerted by this unexpected effect of the Magnet, Shaggy
disengaged himself from the Queen's encircling arms and quickly hid the
talisman in his pocket. The adventurers from Oogaboo were now his firm
friends, and there was no more talk about conquering and binding any of
his party.

"If you insist on conquering anyone," said Shaggy, "you may march with me
to the underground Kingdom of Ruggedo. To conquer the world, as you have
set out to do, you must conquer everyone under its surface as well as
those upon its surface, and no one in all the world needs conquering so
much as Ruggedo."

"Who is he?" asked Ann.

[Illustration]

"The Metal Monarch, King of the Nomes."

"Is he rich?" inquired Major Stockings in an anxious voice.

"Of course," answered Shaggy. "He owns all the metal that lies
underground--gold, silver, copper, brass and tin. He has an idea he also
owns all the metals above ground, for he says all metal was once a part
of his kingdom. So, by conquering the Metal Monarch, you will win all the
riches in the world."

"Ah!" exclaimed General Apple, heaving a deep sigh, "that would be
plunder worth our while. Let's conquer him, Your Majesty."