CHAPTER 1

Although I am an old man, night is generally my time for walking. In the
summer I often leave home early in the morning, and roam about fields
and lanes all day, or even escape for days or weeks together; but,
saving in the country, I seldom go out until after dark, though, Heaven
be thanked, I love its light and feel the cheerfulness it sheds upon the
earth, as much as any creature living.

I have fallen insensibly into this habit, both because it favours my
infirmity and because it affords me greater opportunity of speculating
on the characters and occupations of those who fill the streets. The
glare and hurry of broad noon are not adapted to idle pursuits like
mine; a glimpse of passing faces caught by the light of a street-lamp
or a shop window is often better for my purpose than their full
revelation in the daylight; and, if I must add the truth, night is
kinder in this respect than day, which too often destroys an air-built
castle at the moment of its completion, without the least ceremony or
remorse.

That constant pacing to and fro, that never-ending restlessness, that
incessant tread of feet wearing the rough stones smooth and glossy--is
it not a wonder how the dwellers in narrows ways can bear to hear it!
Think of a sick man in such a place as Saint Martin’s Court, listening
to the footsteps, and in the midst of pain and weariness obliged,
despite himself (as though it were a task he must perform) to detect
the child’s step from the man’s, the slipshod beggar from the booted
exquisite, the lounging from the busy, the dull heel of the sauntering
outcast from the quick tread of an expectant pleasure-seeker--think of
the hum and noise always being present to his sense, and of the stream
of life that will not stop, pouring on, on, on, through all his
restless dreams, as if he were condemned to lie, dead but conscious, in
a noisy churchyard, and had no hope of rest for centuries to come.

Then, the crowds for ever passing and repassing on the bridges (on
those which are free of toll at last), where many stop on fine evenings
looking listlessly down upon the water with some vague idea that by and
by it runs between green banks which grow wider and wider until at last
it joins the broad vast sea--where some halt to rest from heavy loads
and think as they look over the parapet that to smoke and lounge away
one’s life, and lie sleeping in the sun upon a hot tarpaulin, in a
dull, slow, sluggish barge, must be happiness unalloyed--and where
some, and a very different class, pause with heavier loads than they,
remembering to have heard or read in old time that drowning was not a
hard death, but of all means of suicide the easiest and best.

Covent Garden Market at sunrise too, in the spring or summer, when the
fragrance of sweet flowers is in the air, over-powering even the
unwholesome streams of last night’s debauchery, and driving the dusky
thrush, whose cage has hung outside a garret window all night long,
half mad with joy! Poor bird! the only neighbouring thing at all akin
to the other little captives, some of whom, shrinking from the hot
hands of drunken purchasers, lie drooping on the path already, while
others, soddened by close contact, await the time when they shall be
watered and freshened up to please more sober company, and make old
clerks who pass them on their road to business, wonder what has filled
their breasts with visions of the country.

But my present purpose is not to expatiate upon my walks. The story I
am about to relate, and to which I shall recur at intervals,  arose out
of one of these rambles; and thus I have been led to speak of them by
way of preface.

One night I had roamed into the City, and was walking slowly on in my
usual way, musing upon a great many things, when I was arrested by an
inquiry, the purport of which did not reach me, but which seemed to be
addressed to myself, and was preferred in a soft sweet voice that
struck me very pleasantly. I turned hastily round and found at my elbow
a pretty little girl, who begged to be directed to a certain street at
a considerable distance, and indeed in quite another quarter of the
town.

‘It is a very long way from here,’ said I, ‘my child.’

‘I know that, sir,’ she replied timidly. ‘I am afraid it is a very long
way, for I came from there to-night.’

‘Alone?’ said I, in some surprise.

‘Oh, yes, I don’t mind that, but I am a little frightened now, for I
had lost my road.’

‘And what made you ask it of me? Suppose I should tell you wrong?’

‘I am sure you will not do that,’ said the little creature,’ you are
such a very old gentleman, and walk so slow yourself.’

I cannot describe how much I was impressed by this appeal and the
energy with which it was made, which brought a tear into the child’s
clear eye, and made her slight figure tremble as she looked up into my
face.

‘Come,’ said I, ‘I’ll take you there.’

She put her hand in mine as confidingly as if she had known me from her
cradle, and we trudged away together; the little creature accommodating
her pace to mine, and rather seeming to lead and take care of me than I
to be protecting her. I observed that every now and then she stole a
curious look at my face, as if to make quite sure that I was not
deceiving her, and that these glances (very sharp and keen they were
too) seemed to increase her confidence at every repetition.

For my part, my curiosity and interest were at least equal to the
child’s, for child she certainly was, although I thought it probably
from what I could make out, that her very small and delicate frame
imparted a peculiar youthfulness to her appearance. Though more
scantily attired than she might have been she was dressed with perfect
neatness, and betrayed no marks of poverty or neglect.

‘Who has sent you so far by yourself?’ said I.

‘Someone who is very kind to me, sir.’

‘And what have you been doing?’

‘That, I must not tell,’ said the child firmly.

There was something in the manner of this reply which caused me to look
at the little creature with an involuntary expression of surprise; for
I wondered what kind of errand it might be that occasioned her to be
prepared for questioning. Her quick eye seemed to read my thoughts, for
as it met mine she added that there was no harm in what she had been
doing, but it was a great secret--a secret which she did not even know
herself.

This was said with no appearance of cunning or deceit, but with an
unsuspicious frankness that bore the impress of truth. She walked on as
before, growing more familiar with me as we proceeded and talking
cheerfully by the way, but she said no more about her home, beyond
remarking that we were going quite a new road and asking if it were a
short one.

While we were thus engaged, I revolved in my mind a hundred different
explanations of the riddle and rejected them every one. I really felt
ashamed to take advantage of the ingenuousness or grateful feeling of
the child for the purpose of gratifying my curiosity. I love these
little people; and it is not a slight thing when they, who are so fresh
from God, love us. As I had felt pleased at first by her confidence I
determined to deserve it, and to do credit to the nature which had
prompted her to repose it in me.

There was no reason, however, why I should refrain from seeing the
person who had inconsiderately sent her to so great a distance by night
and alone, and as it was not improbable that if she found herself near
home she might take farewell of me and deprive me of the opportunity, I
avoided the most frequented ways and took the most intricate, and thus
it was not until we arrived in the street itself that she knew where we
were. Clapping her hands with pleasure and running on before me for a
short distance, my little acquaintance stopped at a door and remaining
on the step till I came up knocked at it when I joined her.

A part of this door was of glass unprotected by any shutter, which I
did not observe at first, for all was very dark and silent within, and
I was anxious (as indeed the child was also) for an answer to our
summons. When she had knocked twice or thrice there was a noise as if
some person were moving inside, and at length a faint light appeared
through the glass which, as it approached very slowly, the bearer
having to make his way through a great many scattered articles, enabled
me to see both what kind of person it was who advanced and what kind of
place it was through which he came.

It was an old man with long grey hair, whose face and figure as he held
the light above his head and looked before him as he approached, I
could plainly see. Though much altered by age, I fancied I could
recognize in his spare and slender form something of that delicate
mould which I had noticed in the child. Their bright blue eyes were
certainly alike, but his face was so deeply furrowed and so very full
of care, that here all resemblance ceased.

The place through which he made his way at leisure was one of those
receptacles for old and curious things which seem to crouch in odd
corners of this town and to hide their musty treasures from the public
eye in jealousy and distrust. There were suits of mail standing like
ghosts in armour here and there, fantastic carvings brought from
monkish cloisters, rusty weapons of various kinds, distorted figures in
china and wood and iron and ivory: tapestry and strange furniture that
might have been designed in dreams. The haggard aspect of the little
old man was wonderfully suited to the place; he might have groped among
old churches and tombs and deserted houses and gathered all the spoils
with his own hands. There was nothing in the whole collection but was
in keeping with himself nothing that looked older or more worn than he.

As he turned the key in the lock, he surveyed me with some astonishment
which was not diminished when he looked from me to my companion. The
door being opened, the child addressed him as grandfather, and told him
the little story of our companionship.

‘Why, bless thee, child,’ said the old man, patting her on the head,
‘how couldst thou miss thy way? What if I had lost thee, Nell!’

‘I would have found my way back to YOU, grandfather,’ said the child
boldly; ‘never fear.’

The old man kissed her, then turning to me and begging me to walk in, I
did so. The door was closed and locked. Preceding me with the light, he
led me through the place I had already seen from without, into a small
sitting-room behind, in which was another door opening into a kind of
closet, where I saw a little bed that a fairy might have slept in, it
looked so very small and was so prettily arranged. The child took a
candle and tripped into this little room, leaving the old man and me
together.

‘You must be tired, sir,’ said he as he placed a chair near the fire,
‘how can I thank you?’

‘By taking more care of your grandchild another time, my good friend,’
I replied.

‘More care!’ said the old man in a shrill voice, ‘more care of Nelly!
Why, who ever loved a child as I love Nell?’

He said this with such evident surprise that I was perplexed what
answer to make, and the more so because coupled with something feeble
and wandering in his manner, there were in his face marks of deep and
anxious thought which convinced me that he could not be, as I had been
at first inclined to suppose, in a state of dotage or imbecility.

‘I don’t think you consider--’ I began.

‘I don’t consider!’ cried the old man interrupting me, ‘I don’t
consider her! Ah, how little you know of the truth! Little Nelly,
little Nelly!’

It would be impossible for any man, I care not what his form of speech
might be, to express more affection than the dealer in curiosities did,
in these four words. I waited for him to speak again, but he rested his
chin upon his hand and shaking his head twice or thrice fixed his eyes
upon the fire.

While we were sitting thus in silence, the door of the closet opened,
and the child returned, her light brown hair hanging loose about her
neck, and her face flushed with the haste she had made to rejoin us.
She busied herself immediately in preparing supper, and while she was
thus engaged I remarked that the old man took an opportunity of
observing me more closely than he had done yet. I was surprised to see
that all this time everything was done by the child, and that there
appeared to be no other persons but ourselves in the house. I took
advantage of a moment when she was absent to venture a hint on this
point, to which the old man replied that there were few grown persons
as trustworthy or as careful as she.

‘It always grieves me,’ I observed, roused by what I took to be his
selfishness, ‘it always grieves me to contemplate the initiation of
children into the ways of life, when they are scarcely more than
infants. It checks their confidence and simplicity--two of the best
qualities that Heaven gives them--and demands that they share our
sorrows before they are capable of entering into our enjoyments.’

‘It will never check hers,’ said the old man looking steadily at me,
‘the springs are too deep. Besides, the children of the poor know but
few pleasures. Even the cheap delights of childhood must be bought and
paid for.’

‘But--forgive me for saying this--you are surely not so very
poor’--said I.

‘She is not my child, sir,’ returned the old man. ‘Her mother was, and
she was poor. I save nothing--not a penny--though I live as you see,
but’--he laid his hand upon my arm and leant forward to whisper--‘she
shall be rich one of these days, and a fine lady. Don’t you think ill
of me because I use her help. She gives it cheerfully as you see, and
it would break her heart if she knew that I suffered anybody else to do
for me what her little hands could undertake. I don’t consider!’--he
cried with sudden querulousness, ‘why, God knows that this one child is
the thought and object of my life, and yet he never prospers me--no,
never!’

At this juncture, the subject of our conversation again returned, and
the old man motioning to me to approach the table, broke off, and said
no more.

We had scarcely begun our repast when there was a knock at the door by
which I had entered, and Nell bursting into a hearty laugh, which I was
rejoiced to hear, for it was childlike and full of hilarity, said it
was no doubt dear old Kit coming back at last.

‘Foolish Nell!’ said the old man fondling with her hair. ‘She always
laughs at poor Kit.’

The child laughed again more heartily than before, and I could not help
smiling from pure sympathy. The little old man took up a candle and
went to open the door. When he came back, Kit was at his heels.

Kit was a shock-headed, shambling, awkward lad with an uncommonly wide
mouth, very red cheeks, a turned-up nose, and certainly the most
comical expression of face I ever saw. He stopped short at the door on
seeing a stranger, twirled in his hand a perfectly round old hat
without any vestige of a brim, and resting himself now on one leg and
now on the other and changing them constantly, stood in the doorway,
looking into the parlour with the most extraordinary leer I ever
beheld. I entertained a grateful feeling towards the boy from that
minute, for I felt that he was the comedy of the child’s life.

‘A long way, wasn’t it, Kit?’ said the little old man.

‘Why, then, it was a goodish stretch, master,’ returned Kit.

‘Of course you have come back hungry?’

‘Why, then, I do consider myself rather so, master,’ was the answer.

The lad had a remarkable manner of standing sideways as he spoke, and
thrusting his head forward over his shoulder, as if he could not get at
his voice without that accompanying action. I think he would have
amused one anywhere, but the child’s exquisite enjoyment of his oddity,
and the relief it was to find that there was something she associated
with merriment in a place that appeared so unsuited to her, were quite
irresistible. It was a great point too that Kit himself was flattered
by the sensation he created, and after several efforts to preserve his
gravity, burst into a loud roar, and so stood with his mouth wide open
and his eyes nearly shut, laughing violently.

The old man had again relapsed into his former abstraction and took no
notice of what passed, but I remarked that when her laugh was over, the
child’s bright eyes were dimmed with tears, called forth by the
fullness of heart with which she welcomed her uncouth favourite after
the little anxiety of the night. As for Kit himself (whose laugh had
been all the time one of that sort which very little would change into
a cry) he carried a large slice of bread and meat and a mug of beer
into a corner, and applied himself to disposing of them with great
voracity.

‘Ah!’ said the old man turning to me with a sigh, as if I had spoken to
him but that moment, ‘you don’t know what you say when you tell me that
I don’t consider her.’

‘You must not attach too great weight to a remark founded on first
appearances, my friend,’ said I.

‘No,’ returned the old man thoughtfully, ‘no. Come hither, Nell.’

The little girl hastened from her seat, and put her arm about his neck.

‘Do I love thee, Nell?’ said he. ‘Say--do I love thee, Nell, or no?’

The child only answered by her caresses, and laid her head upon his
breast.

‘Why dost thou sob?’ said the grandfather, pressing her closer to him
and glancing towards me. ‘Is it because thou know’st I love thee, and
dost not like that I should seem to doubt it by my question? Well,
well--then let us say I love thee dearly.’

‘Indeed, indeed you do,’ replied the child with great earnestness, ‘Kit
knows you do.’

Kit, who in despatching his bread and meat had been swallowing
two-thirds of his knife at every mouthful with the coolness of a
juggler, stopped short in his operations on being thus appealed to, and
bawled ‘Nobody isn’t such a fool as to say he doosn’t,’ after which he
incapacitated himself for further conversation by taking a most
prodigious sandwich at one bite.

‘She is poor now’--said the old man, patting the child’s cheek, ‘but I
say again that the time is coming when she shall be rich. It has been a
long time coming, but it must come at last; a very long time, but it
surely must come. It has come to other men who do nothing but waste and
riot. When WILL it come to me!’

‘I am very happy as I am, grandfather,’ said the child.

‘Tush, tush!’ returned the old man, ‘thou dost not know--how should’st
thou!’ then he muttered again between his teeth, ‘The time must come, I
am very sure it must. It will be all the better for coming late’; and
then he sighed and fell into his former musing state, and still holding
the child between his knees appeared to be insensible to everything
around him. By this time it wanted but a few minutes of midnight and I
rose to go, which recalled him to himself.

‘One moment, sir,’ he said, ‘Now, Kit--near midnight, boy, and you
still here! Get home, get home, and be true to your time in the
morning, for there’s work to do. Good night! There, bid him good night,
Nell, and let him be gone!’

‘Good night, Kit,’ said the child, her eyes lighting up with merriment
and kindness.

‘Good night, Miss Nell,’ returned the boy.

‘And thank this gentleman,’ interposed the old man, ‘but for whose care
I might have lost my little girl to-night.’

‘No, no, master,’ said Kit, ‘that won’t do, that won’t.’

‘What do you mean?’ cried the old man.

‘I’d have found her, master,’ said Kit, ‘I’d have found her. I’ll bet
that I’d find her if she was above ground, I would, as quick as
anybody, master. Ha, ha, ha!’

Once more opening his mouth and shutting his eyes, and laughing like a
stentor, Kit gradually backed to the door, and roared himself out.

Free of the room, the boy was not slow in taking his departure; when he
had gone, and the child was occupied in clearing the table, the old man
said:

‘I haven’t seemed to thank you, sir, for what you have done to-night,
but I do thank you humbly and heartily, and so does she, and her thanks
are better worth than mine. I should be sorry that you went away, and
thought I was unmindful of your goodness, or careless of her--I am not
indeed.’

I was sure of that, I said, from what I had seen. ‘But,’ I added, ‘may
I ask you a question?’

‘Ay, sir,’ replied the old man, ‘What is it?’

‘This delicate child,’ said I, ‘with so much beauty and
intelligence--has she nobody to care for her but you? Has she no other
companion or advisor?’

‘No,’ he returned, looking anxiously in my face, ‘no, and she wants no
other.’

‘But are you not fearful,’ said I, ‘that you may misunderstand a charge
so tender? I am sure you mean well, but are you quite certain that you
know how to execute such a trust as this? I am an old man, like you,
and I am actuated by an old man’s concern in all that is young and
promising. Do you not think that what I have seen of you and this
little creature to-night must have an interest not wholly free from
pain?’

‘Sir,’ rejoined the old man after a moment’s silence. ‘I have no right
to feel hurt at what you say. It is true that in many respects I am the
child, and she the grown person--that you have seen already. But waking
or sleeping, by night or day, in sickness or health, she is the one
object of my care, and if you knew of how much care, you would look on
me with different eyes, you would indeed. Ah! It’s a weary life for an
old man--a weary, weary life--but there is a great end to gain and that
I keep before me.’

Seeing that he was in a state of excitement and impatience, I turned to
put on an outer coat which I had thrown off on entering the room,
purposing to say no more. I was surprised to see the child standing
patiently by with a cloak upon her arm, and in her hand a hat, and
stick.

‘Those are not mine, my dear,’ said I.

‘No,’ returned the child, ‘they are grandfather’s.’

‘But he is not going out to-night.’

‘Oh, yes, he is,’ said the child, with a smile.

‘And what becomes of you, my pretty one?’

‘Me! I stay here of course. I always do.’

I looked in astonishment towards the old man, but he was, or feigned to
be, busied in the arrangement of his dress. From him I looked back to
the slight gentle figure of the child. Alone! In that gloomy place all
the long, dreary night.

She evinced no consciousness of my surprise, but cheerfully helped the
old man with his cloak, and when he was ready took a candle to light us
out. Finding that we did not follow as she expected, she looked back
with a smile and waited for us.  The old man showed by his face that he
plainly understood the cause of my hesitation, but he merely signed to
me with an inclination of the head to pass out of the room before him,
and remained silent. I had no resource but to comply.

When we reached the door, the child setting down the candle, turned to
say good night and raised her face to kiss me. Then she ran to the old
man, who folded her in his arms and bade God bless her.

‘Sleep soundly, Nell,’ he said in a low voice, ‘and angels guard thy
bed! Do not forget thy prayers, my sweet.’

‘No, indeed,’ answered the child fervently, ‘they make me feel so
happy!’

‘That’s well; I know they do; they should,’ said the old man. ‘Bless
thee a hundred times! Early in the morning I shall be home.’

‘You’ll not ring twice,’ returned the child. ‘The bell wakes me, even
in the middle of a dream.’

With this, they separated. The child opened the door (now guarded by a
shutter which I had heard the boy put up before he left the house) and
with another farewell whose clear and tender note I have recalled a
thousand times, held it until we had passed out. The old man paused a
moment while it was gently closed and fastened on the inside, and
satisfied that this was done, walked on at a slow pace. At the
street-corner he stopped, and regarding me with a troubled countenance
said that our ways were widely different and that he must take his
leave. I would have spoken, but summoning up more alacrity than might
have been expected in one of his appearance, he hurried away. I could
see that twice or thrice he looked back as if to ascertain if I were
still watching him, or perhaps to assure himself that I was not
following at a distance. The obscurity of the night favoured his
disappearance, and his figure was soon beyond my sight.

I remained standing on the spot where he had left me, unwilling to
depart, and yet unknowing why I should loiter there. I looked wistfully
into the street we had lately quitted, and after a time directed my
steps that way. I passed and repassed the house, and stopped and
listened at the door; all was dark, and silent as the grave.

Yet I lingered about, and could not tear myself away, thinking of all
possible harm that might happen to the child--of fires and robberies
and even murder--and feeling as if some evil must ensue if I turned my
back upon the place. The closing of a door or window in the street
brought me before the curiosity-dealer’s once more; I crossed the road
and looked up at the house to assure myself that the noise had not come
from there. No, it was black, cold, and lifeless as before.

There were few passengers astir; the street was sad and dismal, and
pretty well my own. A few stragglers from the theatres hurried by, and
now and then I turned aside to avoid some noisy drunkard as he reeled
homewards, but these interruptions were not frequent and soon ceased.
The clocks struck one. Still I paced up and down, promising myself that
every time should be the last, and breaking faith with myself on some
new plea as often as I did so.

The more I thought of what the old man had said, and of his looks and
bearing, the less I could account for what I had seen and heard. I had
a strong misgiving that his nightly absence was for no good purpose. I
had only come to know the fact through the innocence of the child, and
though the old man was by at the time, and saw my undisguised surprise,
he had preserved a strange mystery upon the subject and offered no word
of explanation. These reflections naturally recalled again more
strongly than before his haggard face, his wandering manner, his
restless anxious looks. His affection for the child might not be
inconsistent with villany of the worst kind; even that very affection
was in itself an extraordinary contradiction, or how could he leave her
thus? Disposed as I was to think badly of him, I never doubted that his
love for her was real. I could not admit the thought, remembering what
had passed between us, and the tone of voice in which he had called her
by her name.

‘Stay here of course,’ the child had said in answer to my question, ‘I
always do!’ What could take him from home by night, and every night! I
called up all the strange tales I had ever heard of dark and secret
deeds committed in great towns and escaping detection for a long series
of years; wild as many of these stories were, I could not find one
adapted to this mystery, which only became the more impenetrable, in
proportion as I sought to solve it.

Occupied with such thoughts as these, and a crowd of others all tending
to the same point, I continued to pace the street for two long hours;
at length the rain began to descend heavily, and then over-powered by
fatigue though no less interested than I had been at first, I engaged
the nearest coach and so got home. A cheerful fire was blazing on the
hearth, the lamp burnt brightly, my clock received me with its old
familiar welcome; everything was quiet, warm and cheering, and in happy
contrast to the gloom and darkness I had quitted.

But all that night, waking or in my sleep, the same thoughts recurred
and the same images retained possession of my brain. I had ever before
me the old dark murky rooms--the gaunt suits of mail with their ghostly
silent air--the faces all awry, grinning from wood and stone--the dust
and rust and worm that lives in wood--and alone in the midst of all
this lumber and decay and ugly age, the beautiful child in her gentle
slumber, smiling through her light and sunny dreams.




CHAPTER 2

After combating, for nearly a week, the feeling which impelled me to
revisit the place I had quitted under the circumstances already
detailed, I yielded to it at length; and determining that this time I
would present myself by the light of day, bent my steps thither early
in the morning.

I walked past the house, and took several turns in the street, with
that kind of hesitation which is natural to a man who is conscious that
the visit he is about to pay is unexpected, and may not be very
acceptable. However, as the door of the shop was shut, and it did not
appear likely that I should be recognized by those within, if I
continued merely to pass up and down before it, I soon conquered this
irresolution, and found myself in the Curiosity Dealer’s warehouse.

The old man and another person were together in the back part, and
there seemed to have been high words between them, for their voices
which were raised to a very high pitch suddenly stopped on my entering,
and the old man advancing hastily towards me, said in a tremulous tone
that he was very glad I had come.

‘You interrupted us at a critical moment,’ said he, pointing to the man
whom I had found in company with him; ‘this fellow will murder me one
of these days. He would have done so, long ago, if he had dared.’

‘Bah! You would swear away my life if you could,’ returned the other,
after bestowing a stare and a frown on me; ‘we all know that!’

‘I almost think I could,’ cried the old man, turning feebly upon him.
‘If oaths, or prayers, or words, could rid me of you, they should. I
would be quit of you, and would be relieved if you were dead.’

‘I know it,’ returned the other. ‘I said so, didn’t I? But neither
oaths, or prayers, nor words, WILL kill me, and therefore I live, and
mean to live.’

‘And his mother died!’ cried the old man, passionately clasping his
hands and looking upward; ‘and this is Heaven’s justice!’

The other stood lounging with his foot upon a chair, and regarded him
with a contemptuous sneer. He was a young man of one-and-twenty or
thereabouts; well made, and certainly handsome, though the expression
of his face was far from prepossessing, having in common with his
manner and even his dress, a dissipated, insolent air which repelled
one.

‘Justice or no justice,’ said the young fellow, ‘here I am and here I
shall stop till such time as I think fit to go, unless you send for
assistance to put me out--which you won’t do, I know. I tell you again
that I want to see my sister.’

‘YOUR sister!’ said the old man bitterly.

‘Ah! You can’t change the relationship,’ returned the other. ‘If you
could, you’d have done it long ago. I want to see my sister, that you
keep cooped up here, poisoning her mind with your sly secrets and
pretending an affection for her that you may work her to death, and add
a few scraped shillings every week to the money you can hardly count. I
want to see her; and I will.’

‘Here’s a moralist to talk of poisoned minds! Here’s a generous spirit
to scorn scraped-up shillings!’ cried the old man, turning from him to
me. ‘A profligate, sir, who has forfeited every claim not only upon
those who have the misfortune to be of his blood, but upon society
which knows nothing of him but his misdeeds. A liar too,’ he added, in
a lower voice as he drew closer to me, ‘who knows how dear she is to
me, and seeks to wound me even there, because there is a stranger
nearby.’

‘Strangers are nothing to me, grandfather,’ said the young fellow
catching at the word, ‘nor I to them, I hope. The best they can do, is
to keep an eye to their business and leave me to mine. There’s a friend
of mine waiting outside, and as it seems that I may have to wait some
time, I’ll call him in, with your leave.’

Saying this, he stepped to the door, and looking down the street
beckoned several times to some unseen person, who, to judge from the
air of impatience with which these signals were accompanied, required a
great quantity of persuasion to induce him to advance. At length there
sauntered up, on the opposite side of the way--with a bad pretense of
passing by accident--a figure conspicuous for its dirty smartness,
which after a great many frowns and jerks of the head, in resistance of
the invitation, ultimately crossed the road and was brought into the
shop.

‘There. It’s Dick Swiveller,’ said the young fellow, pushing him in.
‘Sit down, Swiveller.’

‘But is the old min agreeable?’ said Mr Swiveller in an undertone.

Mr Swiveller complied, and looking about him with a propitiatory smile,
observed that last week was a fine week for the ducks, and this week
was a fine week for the dust; he also observed that whilst standing by
the post at the street-corner, he had observed a pig with a straw in
his mouth issuing out of the tobacco-shop, from which appearance he
augured that another fine week for the ducks was approaching, and that
rain would certainly ensue. He furthermore took occasion to apologize
for any negligence that might be perceptible in his dress, on the
ground that last night he had had ‘the sun very strong in his eyes’; by
which expression he was understood to convey to his hearers in the most
delicate manner possible, the information that he had been extremely
drunk.

‘But what,’ said Mr Swiveller with a sigh, ‘what is the odds so long as
the fire of soul is kindled at the taper of conwiviality, and the wing
of friendship never moults a feather! What is the odds so long as the
spirit is expanded by means of rosy wine, and the present moment is the
least happiest of our existence!’

‘You needn’t act the chairman here,’ said his friend, half aside.

‘Fred!’ cried Mr Swiveller, tapping his nose, ‘a word to the wise is
sufficient for them--we may be good and happy without riches, Fred.
Say not another syllable. I know my cue; smart is the word. Only one
little whisper, Fred--is the old min friendly?’

‘Never you mind,’ replied his friend.

‘Right again, quite right,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘caution is the word,
and caution is the act.’ with that, he winked as if in preservation of
some deep secret, and folding his arms and leaning back in his chair,
looked up at the ceiling with profound gravity.

It was perhaps not very unreasonable to suspect from what had already
passed, that Mr Swiveller was not quite recovered from the effects of
the powerful sunlight to which he had made allusion; but if no such
suspicion had been awakened by his speech, his wiry hair, dull eyes,
and sallow face would still have been strong witnesses against him. His
attire was not, as he had himself hinted, remarkable for the  nicest
arrangement, but was in a state of disorder which strongly induced the
idea that he had gone to bed in it. It consisted of a brown body-coat
with a great many brass buttons up the front and only one behind, a
bright check neckerchief, a plaid waistcoat, soiled white trousers, and
a very limp hat, worn with the wrong side foremost, to hide a hole in
the brim. The breast of his coat was ornamented with an outside pocket
from which there peeped forth the cleanest end of a very large and very
ill-favoured handkerchief; his dirty wristbands were pulled on as far
as possible and ostentatiously folded back over his cuffs; he displayed
no gloves, and carried a yellow cane having at the top a bone hand with
the semblance of a ring on its little finger and a black ball in its
grasp. With all these personal advantages (to which may be added a
strong savour of tobacco-smoke, and a prevailing greasiness of
appearance) Mr Swiveller leant back in his chair with his eyes fixed on
the ceiling, and occasionally pitching his voice to the needful key,
obliged the company with a few bars of an intensely dismal air, and
then, in the middle of a note, relapsed into his former silence.

The old man sat himself down in a chair, and with folded hands, looked
sometimes at his grandson and sometimes at his strange companion, as if
he were utterly powerless and had no resource but to leave them to do
as they pleased. The young man reclined against a table at no great
distance from his friend, in apparent indifference to everything that
had passed; and I--who felt the difficulty of any interference,
notwithstanding that the old man had appealed to me, both by words and
looks--made the best feint I could of being occupied in examining some
of the goods that were disposed for sale, and paying very little
attention to a person before me.

The silence was not of long duration, for Mr Swiveller, after favouring
us with several melodious assurances that his heart was in the
Highlands, and that he wanted but his Arab steed as a preliminary to
the achievement of great feats of valour and loyalty, removed his eyes
from the ceiling and subsided into prose again.

‘Fred,’ said Mr Swiveller stopping short, as if the idea had suddenly
occurred to him, and speaking in the same audible whisper as before,
‘is the old min friendly?’

‘What does it matter?’ returned his friend peevishly.

‘No, but IS he?’ said Dick.

‘Yes, of course. What do I care whether he is or not?’

Emboldened as it seemed by this reply to enter into a more general
conversation, Mr Swiveller plainly laid himself out to captivate our
attention.

He began by remarking that soda-water, though a good thing in the
abstract, was apt to lie cold upon the stomach unless qualified with
ginger, or a small infusion of brandy, which latter article he held to
be preferable in all cases, saving for the one consideration of
expense. Nobody venturing to dispute these positions, he proceeded to
observe that the human hair was a great retainer of tobacco-smoke, and
that the young gentlemen of Westminster and Eton, after eating vast
quantities of apples to conceal any scent of cigars from their anxious
friends, were usually detected in consequence of their heads possessing
this remarkable property; when he concluded that if the Royal Society
would turn their attention to the circumstance, and endeavour to find
in the resources of science a means of preventing such untoward
revelations, they might indeed be looked upon as benefactors to
mankind. These opinions being equally incontrovertible with those he
had already pronounced, he went on to inform us that Jamaica rum,
though unquestionably an agreeable spirit of great richness and
flavour, had the drawback of remaining constantly present to the taste
next day; and nobody being venturous enough to argue this point either,
he increased in confidence and became yet more companionable and
communicative.

‘It’s a devil of a thing, gentlemen,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘when
relations fall out and disagree. If the wing of friendship should never
moult a feather, the wing of relationship should never be clipped, but
be always expanded and serene. Why should a grandson and grandfather
peg away at each other with mutual wiolence when all might be bliss and
concord. Why not jine hands and forgit it?’

‘Hold your tongue,’ said his friend.

‘Sir,’ replied Mr Swiveller, ‘don’t you interrupt the chair.
Gentlemen, how does the case stand, upon the present occasion?  Here is
a jolly old grandfather--I say it with the utmost respect--and here is
a wild, young grandson. The jolly old grandfather says to the wild
young grandson, “I have brought you up and educated you, Fred; I have
put you in the way of getting on in life; you have bolted a little out
of course, as young fellows often do; and you shall never have another
chance, nor the ghost of half a one.”  The wild young grandson makes
answer to this and says, “You’re as rich as rich can be; you have been
at no uncommon expense on my account, you’re saving up piles of money
for my little sister that lives with you in a secret, stealthy,
hugger-muggering kind of way and with no manner of enjoyment--why can’t
you stand a trifle for your grown-up relation?” The jolly old
grandfather unto this, retorts, not only that he declines to fork out
with that cheerful readiness which is always so agreeable and pleasant
in a gentleman of his time of life, but that he will bow up, and call
names, and make reflections whenever they meet. Then the plain question
is, an’t it a pity that this state of things should continue, and how
much better would it be for the gentleman to hand over a reasonable
amount of tin, and make it all right and comfortable?’

Having delivered this oration with a great many waves and flourishes of
the hand, Mr Swiveller abruptly thrust the head of his cane into his
mouth as if to prevent himself from impairing the effect of his speech
by adding one other word.

‘Why do you hunt and persecute me, God help me!’ said the old man
turning to his grandson. ‘Why do you bring your prolifigate companions
here? How often am I to tell you that my life is one of care and
self-denial, and that I am poor?’

‘How often am I to tell you,’ returned the other, looking coldly at
him, ‘that I know better?’

‘You have chosen your own path,’ said the old man. ‘Follow it.  Leave
Nell and me to toil and work.’

‘Nell will be a woman soon,’ returned the other, ‘and, bred in your
faith, she’ll forget her brother unless he shows himself sometimes.’

‘Take care,’ said the old man with sparkling eyes, ‘that she does not
forget you when you would have her memory keenest. Take care that the
day don’t come when you walk barefoot in the streets, and she rides by
in a gay carriage of her own.’

‘You mean when she has your money?’ retorted the other. ‘How like a
poor man he talks!’

‘And yet,’ said the old man dropping his voice and speaking like one
who thinks aloud, ‘how poor we are, and what a life it is! The cause is
a young child’s guiltless of all harm or wrong, but nothing goes well
with it! Hope and patience, hope and patience!’

These words were uttered in too low a tone to reach the ears of the
young men.  Mr Swiveller appeared to think that they implied some mental
struggle consequent upon the powerful effect of his address, for he
poked his friend with his cane and whispered his conviction that he had
administered ‘a clincher,’ and that he expected a commission on the
profits. Discovering his mistake after a while, he appeared to grow
rather sleepy and discontented, and had more than once suggested the
propriety of an immediate departure, when the door opened, and the
child herself appeared.




CHAPTER 3

The child was closely followed by an elderly man of remarkably hard
features and forbidding aspect, and so low in stature as to be quite a
dwarf, though his head and face were large enough for the body of a
giant. His black eyes were restless, sly, and cunning; his mouth and
chin, bristly with the stubble of a coarse hard beard; and his
complexion was one of that kind which never looks clean or wholesome.
But what added most to the grotesque expression of his face was a
ghastly smile, which, appearing to be the mere result of habit and to
have no connection with any mirthful or complacent feeling, constantly
revealed the few discoloured fangs that were yet scattered in his
mouth, and gave him the aspect of a panting dog. His dress consisted of
a large high-crowned hat, a worn dark suit, a pair of capacious shoes,
and a dirty white neckerchief sufficiently limp and crumpled to
disclose the greater portion of his wiry throat. Such hair as he had
was of a grizzled black, cut short and straight upon his temples, and
hanging in a frowzy fringe about his ears. His hands, which were of a
rough, coarse grain, were very dirty; his fingernails were crooked,
long, and yellow.

There was ample time to note these particulars, for besides that they
were sufficiently obvious without very close observation, some moments
elapsed before any one broke silence. The child advanced timidly
towards her brother and put her hand in his, the dwarf (if we may call
him so) glanced keenly at all present, and the curiosity-dealer, who
plainly had not expected his uncouth visitor, seemed disconcerted and
embarrassed.

‘Ah!’ said the dwarf, who with his hand stretched out above his eyes
had been surveying the young man attentively, ‘that should be your
grandson, neighbour!’

‘Say rather that he should not be,’ replied the old man. ‘But he is.’

‘And that?’ said the dwarf, pointing to Dick Swiveller.

‘Some friend of his, as welcome here as he,’ said the old man.

‘And that?’ inquired the dwarf, wheeling round and pointing straight at
me.

‘A gentleman who was so good as to bring Nell home the other night when
she lost her way, coming from your house.’

The little man turned to the child as if to chide her or express his
wonder, but as she was talking to the young man, held his peace, and
bent his head to listen.

‘Well, Nelly,’ said the young fellow aloud. ‘Do they teach you to hate
me, eh?’

‘No, no. For shame. Oh, no!’ cried the child.

‘To love me, perhaps?’ pursued her brother with a sneer.

‘To do neither,’ she returned. ‘They never speak to me about you.
Indeed they never do.’

‘I dare be bound for that,’ he said, darting a bitter look at the
grandfather. ‘I dare be bound for that Nell. Oh! I believe you there!’

‘But I love you dearly, Fred,’ said the child.

‘No doubt!’

‘I do indeed, and always will,’ the child repeated with great emotion,
‘but oh! If you would leave off vexing him and making him unhappy, then
I could love you more.’

‘I see!’ said the young man, as he stooped carelessly over the child,
and having kissed her, pushed her from him: ‘There--get you away now
you have said your lesson. You needn’t whimper. We part good friends
enough, if that’s the matter.’

He remained silent, following her with his eyes, until she had gained
her little room and closed the door; and then turning to the dwarf,
said abruptly,

‘Harkee, Mr--’

‘Meaning me?’ returned the dwarf. ‘Quilp is my name. You might
remember. It’s not a long one--Daniel Quilp.’

‘Harkee, Mr Quilp, then,’ pursued the other, ‘You have some influence
with my grandfather there.’

‘Some,’ said Mr Quilp emphatically.

‘And are in a few of his mysteries and secrets.’

‘A few,’ replied Quilp, with equal dryness.

‘Then let me tell him once for all, through you, that I will come into
and go out of this place as often as I like, so long as he keeps Nell
here; and that if he wants to be quit of me, he must first be quit of
her. What have I done to be made a bugbear of, and to be shunned and
dreaded as if I brought the plague? He’ll tell you that I have no
natural affection; and that I care no more for Nell, for her own sake,
than I do for him. Let him say so. I care for the whim, then, of coming
to and fro and reminding her of my existence. I WILL see her when I
please. That’s my point. I came here to-day to maintain it, and I’ll
come here again fifty times with the same object and always with the
same success. I said I would stop till I had gained it.  I have done
so, and now my visit’s ended. Come Dick.’

‘Stop!’ cried Mr Swiveller, as his companion turned toward the door.
‘Sir!’

‘Sir, I am your humble servant,’ said Mr Quilp, to whom the
monosyllable was addressed.

‘Before I leave the gay and festive scene, and halls of dazzling light,
sir,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘I will with your permission, attempt a slight
remark. I came here, sir, this day, under the impression that the old
min was friendly.’

‘Proceed, sir,’ said Daniel Quilp; for the orator had made a sudden
stop.

‘Inspired by this idea and the sentiments it awakened, sir, and feeling
as a mutual friend that badgering, baiting, and bullying, was not the
sort of thing calculated to expand the souls and promote the social
harmony of the contending parties, I took upon myself to suggest a
course which is THE course to be adopted to the present occasion.  Will
you allow me to whisper half a syllable, sir?’

Without waiting for the permission he sought, Mr Swiveller stepped up
to the dwarf, and leaning on his shoulder and stooping down to get at
his ear, said in a voice which was perfectly audible to all present,

‘The watch-word to the old min is--fork.’

‘Is what?’ demanded Quilp.

‘Is fork, sir, fork,’ replied Mr Swiveller slapping his pocket. ‘You
are awake, sir?’

The dwarf nodded. Mr Swiveller drew back and nodded likewise, then drew
a little further back and nodded again, and so on. By these means he in
time reached the door, where he gave a great cough to attract the
dwarf’s attention and gain an opportunity of expressing in dumb show,
the closest confidence and most inviolable secrecy.  Having performed
the serious pantomime that was necessary for the due conveyance of
these idea, he cast himself upon his friend’s track, and vanished.

‘Humph!’ said the dwarf with a sour look and a shrug of his shoulders,
‘so much for dear relations. Thank God I acknowledge none! Nor need you
either,’ he added, turning to the old man, ‘if you were not as weak as
a reed, and nearly as senseless.’

‘What would you have me do?’ he retorted in a kind of helpless
desperation. ‘It is easy to talk and sneer. What would you have me do?’

‘What would I do if I was in your case?’ said the dwarf.

‘Something violent, no doubt.’

‘You’re right there,’ returned the little man, highly gratified by the
compliment, for such he evidently considered it; and grinning like a
devil as he rubbed his dirty hands together. ‘Ask Mrs Quilp, pretty Mrs
Quilp, obedient, timid, loving Mrs Quilp. But that reminds me--I have
left her all alone, and she will be anxious and know not a moment’s
peace till I return. I know she’s always in that condition when I’m
away, thought she doesn’t dare to say so, unless I lead her on and tell
her she may speak freely and I won’t be angry with her.  Oh!
well-trained Mrs Quilp.’

The creature appeared quite horrible with his monstrous head and little
body, as he rubbed his hands slowly round, and round, and round
again--with something fantastic even in his manner of performing this
slight action--and, dropping his shaggy brows and cocking his chin in
the air, glanced upward with a stealthy look of exultation that an imp
might have copied and appropriated to himself.

‘Here,’ he said, putting his hand into his breast and sidling up to the
old man as he spoke; ‘I brought it myself for fear of accidents, as,
being in gold, it was something large and heavy for Nell to carry in
her bag. She need be accustomed to such loads betimes though,
neighbor, for she will carry weight when you are dead.’

‘Heaven send she may! I hope so,’ said the old man with something like
a groan.

‘Hope so!’ echoed the dwarf, approaching close to his ear; ‘neighbour,
I would I knew in what good investment all these supplies are sunk. But
you are a deep man, and keep your secret close.’

‘My secret!’ said the other with a haggard look. ‘Yes, you’re
right--I--I--keep it close--very close.’

He said no more, but taking the money turned away with a slow,
uncertain step, and pressed his hand upon his head like a weary and
dejected man. The dwarf watched him sharply, while he passed into the
little sitting-room and locked it in an iron safe above the
chimney-piece; and after musing for a short space, prepared to take his
leave, observing that unless he made good haste, Mrs Quilp would
certainly be in fits on his return.

‘And so, neighbour,’ he added, ‘I’ll turn my face homewards, leaving my
love for Nelly and hoping she may never lose her way again, though her
doing so HAS procured me an honour I didn’t expect.’ With that he bowed
and leered at me, and with a keen glance around which seemed to
comprehend every object within his range of vision, however, small or
trivial, went his way.

I had several times essayed to go myself, but the old man had always
opposed it and entreated me to remain. As he renewed his entreaties on
our being left along, and adverted with many thanks to the former
occasion of our being together, I willingly yielded to his persuasions,
and sat down, pretending to examine some curious miniatures and a few
old medals which he placed before me. It needed no great pressing to
induce me to stay, for if my curiosity has been excited on the occasion
of my first visit, it certainly was not diminished now.

Nell joined us before long, and bringing some needle-work to the table,
sat by the old man’s side. It was pleasant to observe the fresh flowers
in the room, the pet bird with a green bough shading his little cage,
the breath of freshness and youth which seemed to rustle through the
old dull house and hover round the child. It was curious, but not so
pleasant, to turn from the beauty and grace of the girl, to the
stooping figure, care-worn face, and jaded aspect of the old man.  As
he grew weaker and more feeble, what would become of this lonely little
creature; poor protector as he was, say that he died--what would be her
fate, then?

The old man almost answered my thoughts, as he laid his hand on hers,
and spoke aloud.

‘I’ll be of better cheer, Nell,’ he said; ‘there must be good fortune
in store for thee--I do not ask it for myself, but thee. Such miseries
must fall on thy innocent head without it, that I cannot believe but
that, being tempted, it will come at last!’

She looked cheerfully into his face, but made no answer.

‘When I think,’ said he, ‘of the many years--many in thy short
life--that thou has lived with me; of my monotonous existence, knowing
no companions of thy own age nor any childish pleasures; of the
solitude in which thou has grown to be what thou art, and in which thou
hast lived apart from nearly all thy kind but one old man; I sometimes
fear I have dealt hardly by thee, Nell.’

‘Grandfather!’ cried the child in unfeigned surprise.

‘Not in intention--no no,’ said he. ‘I have ever looked forward to the
time that should enable thee to mix among the gayest and prettiest, and
take thy station with the best. But I still look forward, Nell, I still
look forward, and if I should be forced to leave thee, meanwhile, how
have I fitted thee for struggles with the world? The poor bird yonder
is as well qualified to encounter it, and be turned adrift upon its
mercies--Hark! I hear Kit outside. Go to him, Nell, go to him.’

She rose, and hurrying away, stopped, turned back, and put her arms
about the old man’s neck, then left him and hurried away again--but
faster this time, to hide her falling tears.

‘A word in your ear, sir,’ said the old man in a hurried whisper. ‘I
have been rendered uneasy by what you said the other night, and can
only plead that I have done all for the best--that it is too late to
retract, if I could (though I cannot)--and that I hope to triumph yet.
All is for her sake. I have borne great poverty myself, and would spare
her the sufferings that poverty carries with it. I would spare her the
miseries that brought her mother, my own dear child, to an early grave.
I would leave her--not with resources which could be easily spent or
squandered away, but with what would place her beyond the reach of want
for ever. You mark me sir? She shall have no pittance, but a
fortune--Hush! I can say no more than that, now or at any other time,
and she is here again!’

The eagerness with which all this was poured into my ear, the trembling
of the hand with which he clasped my arm, the strained and starting
eyes he fixed upon me, the wild vehemence and agitation of his manner,
filled me with amazement. All that I had heard and seen, and a great
part of what he had said himself, led me to suppose that he was a
wealthy man. I could form no comprehension of his character, unless he
were one of those miserable wretches who, having made gain the sole end
and object of their lives and having succeeded in amassing great
riches, are constantly tortured by the dread of poverty, and beset by
fears of loss and ruin. Many things he had said which I had been at a
loss to understand, were quite reconcilable with the idea thus
presented to me, and at length I concluded that beyond all doubt he was
one of this unhappy race.

The opinion was not the result of hasty consideration, for which indeed
there was no opportunity at that time, as the child came directly, and
soon occupied herself in preparations for giving Kit a writing lesson,
of which it seemed he had a couple every week, and one regularly on
that evening, to the great mirth and enjoyment both of himself and his
instructress. To relate how it was a long time before his modesty could
be so far prevailed upon as it admit of his sitting down in the
parlour, in the presence of an unknown gentleman--how, when he did set
down, he tucked up his sleeves and squared his elbows and put his face
close to the copy-book and squinted horribly at the lines--how, from
the very first moment of having the pen in his hand, he began to wallow
in blots, and to daub himself with ink up to the very roots of his
hair--how, if he did by accident form a letter properly, he immediately
smeared it out again with his arm in his preparations to make
another--how, at every fresh mistake, there was a fresh burst of
merriment from the child and louder and not less hearty laugh from poor
Kit himself--and how there was all the way through, notwithstanding, a
gentle wish on her part to teach, and an anxious desire on his to
learn--to relate all these particulars would no doubt occupy more space
and time than they deserve. It will be sufficient to say that the
lesson was given--that evening passed and night came on--that the old
man again grew restless and impatient--that he quitted the house
secretly at the same hour as before--and that the child was once more
left alone within its gloomy walls.

And now that I have carried this history so far in my own character and
introduced these personages to the reader, I shall for the convenience
of the narrative detach myself from its further course, and leave those
who have prominent and necessary parts in it to speak and act for
themselves.




CHAPTER 4

Mr and Mrs Quilp resided on Tower Hill; and in her bower on Tower Hill
Mrs Quilp was left to pine the absence of her lord, when he quitted her
on the business which he had already seen to transact.

Mr Quilp could scarcely be said to be of any particular trade or
calling, though his pursuits were diversified and his occupations
numerous. He collected the rents of whole colonies of filthy streets
and alleys by the waterside, advanced money to the seamen and petty
officers of merchant vessels, had a share in the ventures of divers
mates of East Indiamen, smoked his smuggled cigars under the very nose
of the Custom House, and made appointments on ‘Change with men in
glazed hats and round jackets pretty well every day. On the Surrey side
of the river was a small rat-infested dreary yard called ‘Quilp’s
Wharf,’ in which were a little wooden counting-house burrowing all awry
in the dust as if it had fallen from the clouds and ploughed into the
ground; a few fragments of rusty anchors; several large iron rings;
some piles of rotten wood; and two or three heaps of old sheet copper,
crumpled, cracked, and battered. On Quilp’s Wharf, Daniel Quilp was a
ship-breaker, yet to judge from these appearances he must either have
been a ship-breaker on a very small scale, or have broken his ships up
very small indeed. Neither did the place present any extraordinary
aspect of life or activity, as its only human occupant was an
amphibious boy in a canvas suit, whose sole change of occupation was
from sitting on the head of a pile and throwing stones into the mud
when the tide was out, to standing with his hands in his pockets gazing
listlessly on the motion and on the bustle of the river at high-water.

The dwarf’s lodging on Tower hill comprised, besides the needful
accommodation for himself and Mrs Quilp, a small sleeping-closet for
that lady’s mother, who resided with the couple and waged perpetual war
with Daniel; of whom, notwithstanding, she stood in no slight dread.
Indeed, the ugly creature contrived by some means or other--whether by
his ugliness or his ferocity or his natural cunning is no great
matter--to impress with a wholesome fear of his anger, most of those
with whom he was brought into daily contact and communication. Over
nobody had he such complete ascendance as Mrs Quilp herself--a pretty
little, mild-spoken, blue-eyed woman, who having allied herself in
wedlock to the dwarf in one of those strange infatuations of which
examples are by no means scarce, performed a sound practical penance
for her folly, every day of her life.

It has been said that Mrs Quilp was pining in her bower. In her bower
she was, but not alone, for besides the old lady her mother of whom
mention has recently been made, there were present some half-dozen
ladies of the neighborhood who had happened by a strange accident (and
also by a little understanding among themselves) to drop in one after
another, just about tea-time. This being a season favourable to
conversation, and the room being a cool, shady, lazy kind of place,
with some plants at the open window shutting out the dust, and
interposing pleasantly enough between the tea table within and the old
Tower without, it is no wonder that the ladies felt an inclination to
talk and linger, especially when there are taken into account the
additional inducements of fresh butter, new bread, shrimps, and
watercresses.

Now, the ladies being together under these circumstances, it was
extremely natural that the discourse should turn upon the propensity of
mankind to tyrannize over the weaker sex, and the duty that developed
upon the weaker sex to resist that tyranny and assert their rights and
dignity. It was natural for four reasons: firstly, because Mrs Quilp
being a young woman and notoriously under the dominion of her husband
ought to be excited to rebel; secondly, because Mrs Quilp’s parent was
known to be laudably shrewish in her disposition and inclined to resist
male authority; thirdly, because each visitor wished to show for
herself how superior she was in this respect to the generality of her
sex; and fourthly, because the company being accustomed to scandalise
each other in pairs, were deprived of their usual subject of
conversation now that they were all assembled in close friendship, and
had consequently no better employment than to attack the common enemy.

Moved by these considerations, a stout lady opened the proceedings by
inquiring, with an air of great concern and sympathy, how Mr Quilp was;
whereunto Mr Quilp’s wife’s mother replied sharply, ‘Oh! He was well
enough--nothing much was every the matter with him--and ill weeds were
sure to thrive.’ All the ladies then sighed in concert, shook their
heads gravely, and looked at Mrs Quilp as a martyr.

‘Ah!’ said the spokeswoman, ‘I wish you’d give her a little of your
advice, Mrs Jiniwin’--Mrs Quilp had been a Miss Jiniwin it should be
observed--‘nobody knows better than you, ma’am, what us women owe to
ourselves.’

‘Owe indeed, ma’am!’ replied Mrs Jiniwin. ‘When my poor husband, her
dear father, was alive, if he had ever ventured a cross word to me, I’d
have--’ The good old lady did not finish the sentence, but she twisted
off the head of a shrimp with a vindictiveness which seemed to imply
that the action was in some degree a substitute for words. In this
light it was clearly understood by the other party, who immediately
replied with great approbation, ‘You quite enter into my feelings,
ma’am, and it’s jist what I’d do myself.’

‘But you have no call to do it,’ said Mrs Jiniwin. ‘Luckily for you,
you have no more occasion to do it than I had.’

‘No woman need have, if she was true to herself,’ rejoined the stout
lady.

‘Do you hear that, Betsy?’ said Mrs Jiniwin, in a warning voice.  ‘How
often have I said the same words to you, and almost gone down my knees
when I spoke ‘em!’

Poor Mrs Quilp, who had looked in a state of helplessness from one face
of condolence to another, coloured, smiled, and shook her head
doubtfully. This was the signal for a general clamour, which beginning
in a low murmur gradually swelled into a great noise in which everybody
spoke at once, and all said that she being a young woman had no right
to set up her opinions against the experiences of those who knew so
much better; that it was very wrong of her not to take the advice of
people who had nothing at heart but her good; that it was next door to
being downright ungrateful to conduct herself in that manner; that if
she had no respect for herself she ought to have some for other women,
all of whom she compromised by her meekness; and that if she had no
respect for other women, the time would come when other women would
have no respect for her; and she would be very sorry for that, they
could tell her. Having dealt out these admonitions, the ladies fell to
a more powerful assault than they had yet made upon the  mixed tea, new
bread, fresh butter, shrimps, and watercresses, and said that their
vexation was so great to see her going on like that, that they could
hardly bring themselves to eat a single morsel.

It’s all very fine to talk,’ said Mrs Quilp with much simplicity, ‘but
I know that if I was to die to-morrow, Quilp could marry anybody he
pleased--now that he could, I know!’

There was quite a scream of indignation at this idea. Marry whom he
pleased! They would like to see him dare to think of marrying any of
them; they would like to see the faintest approach to such a thing.
One lady (a widow) was quite certain she should stab him if he hinted
at it.

‘Very well,’ said Mrs Quilp, nodding her head, ‘as I said just now,
it’s very easy to talk, but I say again that I know--that I’m
sure--Quilp has such a way with him when he likes, that the best
looking woman here couldn’t refuse him if I was dead, and she was free,
and he chose to make love to her. Come!’

Everybody bridled up at this remark, as much as to say, ‘I know you
mean me. Let him try--that’s all.’ and yet for some hidden reason they
were all angry with the widow, and each lady whispered in her
neighbour’s ear that it was very plain that said widow thought herself
the person referred to, and what a puss she was!

‘Mother knows,’ said Mrs Quilp, ‘that what I say is quite correct, for
she often said so before we were married. Didn’t you say so, mother?’

This inquiry involved the respected lady in rather a delicate position,
for she certainly had been an active party in making her daughter Mrs
Quilp, and, besides, it was not supporting the family credit to
encourage the idea that she had married a man whom nobody else would
have. On the other hand, to exaggerate the captivating qualities of her
son-in-law would be to weaken the cause of revolt, in which all her
energies were deeply engaged. Beset by these opposing considerations,
Mrs Jiniwin admitted the powers of insinuation, but denied the right to
govern, and with a timely compliment to the stout lady brought back the
discussion to the point from which it had strayed.

‘Oh! It’s a sensible and proper thing indeed, what Mrs George has
said!’ exclaimed the old lady. ‘If women are only true to
themselves!--But Betsy isn’t, and more’s the shame and pity.’

‘Before I’d let a man order me about as Quilp orders her,’ said Mrs
George, ‘before I’d consent to stand in awe of a man as she does of
him, I’d--I’d kill myself, and write a letter first to say he did it!’

This remark being loudly commended and approved of, another lady (from
the Minories) put in her word:

‘Mr Quilp may be a very nice man,’ said this lady, ‘and I supposed
there’s no doubt he is, because Mrs Quilp says he is, and Mrs Jiniwin
says he is, and they ought to know, or nobody does. But still he is not
quite a--what one calls a handsome man, nor quite a young man neither,
which might be a little excuse for him if anything could be; whereas
his wife is young, and is good-looking, and is a woman--which is the
greatest thing after all.’

This last clause being delivered with extraordinary pathos, elicited a
corresponding murmer from the hearers, stimulated by which the lady
went on to remark that if such a husband was cross and unreasonable
with such a wife, then--

‘If he is!’ interposed the mother, putting down her tea-cup and
brushing the crumbs out of her lap, preparatory to making a solemn
declaration. ‘If he is! He is the greatest tyrant that every lived, she
daren’t call her soul her own, he makes her tremble with a word and
even with a look, he frightens her to death, and she hasn’t the spirit
to give him a word back, no, not a single word.’

Notwithstanding that the fact had been notorious beforehand to all the
tea-drinkers, and had been discussed and expatiated on at every
tea-drinking in the neighbourhood for the last twelve months, this
official communication was no sooner made than they all began to talk
at once and to vie with each other in vehemence and volubility.  Mrs
George remarked that people would talk, that people had often said this
to her before, that Mrs Simmons then and there present had told her so
twenty times, that she had always said, ‘No, Henrietta Simmons, unless
I see it with my own eyes and hear it with my own ears, I never will
believe it.’ Mrs Simmons corroborated this testimony and added strong
evidence of her own. The lady from the Minories recounted a successful
course of treatment under which she had placed her own husband, who,
from manifesting one month after marriage unequivocal symptoms of the
tiger, had by this means become subdued into a perfect lamb. Another
lady recounted her own personal struggle and final triumph, in the
course whereof she had found it necessary to call in her mother and two
aunts, and to weep incessantly night and day for six weeks. A third,
who in the general confusion could secure no other listener, fastened
herself upon a young woman still unmarried who happened to be amongst
them, and conjured her, as she valued her own peace of mind and
happiness to profit by this solemn occasion, to take example from the
weakness of Mrs Quilp, and from that time forth to direct her whole
thoughts to taming and subduing the rebellious spirit of man. The noise
was at its height, and half the company had elevated their voices into
a perfect shriek in order to drown the voices of the other half, when
Mrs Jiniwin was seen to change colour and shake her forefinger
stealthily, as if exhorting them to silence. Then, and not until then,
Daniel Quilp himself, the cause and occasion of all this clamour, was
observed to be in the room, looking on and listening with profound
attention.

‘Go on, ladies, go on,’ said Daniel. ‘Mrs Quilp, pray ask the ladies to
stop to supper, and have a couple of lobsters and something light and
palatable.’

‘I--I--didn’t ask them to tea, Quilp,’ stammered his wife. ‘It’s quite
an accident.’

‘So much the better, Mrs Quilp; these accidental parties are always the
pleasantest,’ said the dwarf, rubbing his hands so hard that he seemed
to be engaged in manufacturing, of the dirt with which they were
encrusted, little charges for popguns. ‘What! Not going, ladies, you
are not going, surely!’

His fair enemies tossed their heads slightly as they sought their
respective bonnets and shawls, but left all verbal contention to Mrs
Jiniwin, who finding herself in the position of champion, made a faint
struggle to sustain the character.

‘And why not stop to supper, Quilp,’ said the old lady, ‘if my daughter
had a mind?’

‘To be sure,’ rejoined Daniel. ‘Why not?’

‘There’s nothing dishonest or wrong in a supper, I hope?’ said Mrs
Jiniwin.

‘Surely not,’ returned the dwarf. ‘Why should there be? Nor anything
unwholesome, either, unless there’s lobster-salad or prawns, which I’m
told are not good for digestion.’

‘And you wouldn’t like your wife to be attacked with that, or anything
else that would make her uneasy would you?’ said Mrs Jiniwin.

‘Not for a score of worlds,’ replied the dwarf with a grin. ‘Not even
to have a score of mothers-in-law at the same time--and what a blessing
that would be!’

‘My daughter’s your wife, Mr Quilp, certainly,’ said the old lady with
a giggle, meant for satirical and to imply that he needed to be
reminded of the fact; ‘your wedded wife.’

‘So she is, certainly. So she is,’ observed the dwarf.

‘And she has a right to do as she likes, I hope, Quilp,’ said the
old lady trembling, partly with anger and partly with a secret fear of
her impish son-in-law.

‘Hope she has!’ he replied. ‘Oh! Don’t you know she has? Don’t you know
she has, Mrs Jiniwin?

‘I know she ought to have, Quilp, and would have, if she was of my way
of thinking.’

‘Why an’t you of your mother’s way of thinking, my dear?’ said the
dwarf, turing round and addressing his wife, ‘why don’t you always
imitate your mother, my dear? She’s the ornament of her sex--your
father said so every day of his life. I am sure he did.’

‘Her father was a blessed creetur, Quilp, and worthy twenty thousand of
some people,’ said Mrs Jiniwin; ‘twenty hundred million thousand.’

‘I should like to have known him,’ remarked the dwarf. ‘I dare say he
was a blessed creature then; but I’m sure he is now. It was a happy
release. I believe he had suffered a long time?’

The old lady gave a gasp, but nothing came of it; Quilp resumed, with
the same malice in his eye and the same sarcastic politeness on his
tongue.

‘You look ill, Mrs Jiniwin; I know you have been exciting yourself too
much--talking perhaps, for it is your weakness. Go to bed. Do go to
bed.’

‘I shall go when I please, Quilp, and not before.’

‘But please to do now. Do please to go now,’ said the dwarf.

The old woman looked angrily at him, but retreated as he advanced, and
falling back before him, suffered him to shut the door upon her and
bolt her out among the guests, who were by this time crowding
downstairs. Being left along with his wife, who sat trembling in a
corner with her eyes fixed upon the ground, the little man planted
himself before her, and folding his arms looked steadily at her for a
long time without speaking.

‘Mrs Quilp,’ he said at last.

‘Yes, Quilp,’ she replead meekly.

Instead of pursuing the theme he had in his mind, Quilp folded his arms
again, and looked at her more sternly than before, while she averted
her eyes and kept them on the ground.

‘Mrs Quilp.’

‘Yes, Quilp.’

‘If ever you listen to these beldames again, I’ll bite you.’

With this laconic threat, which he accompanied with a snarl that gave
him the appearance of being particularly in earnest, Mr Quilp bade her
clear the teaboard away, and bring the rum. The spirit being set before
him in a huge case-bottle, which had originally come out of some ship’s
locker, he settled himself in an arm-chair with his large head and face
squeezed up against the back, and his little legs planted on the table.

‘Now, Mrs Quilp,’ he said; ‘I feel in a smoking humour, and shall
probably blaze away all night. But sit where you are, if you please, in
case I want you.’

His wife returned no other reply than the necessary ‘Yes, Quilp,’ and
the small lord of the creation took his first cigar and mixed his first
glass of grog. The sun went down and the stars peeped out, the Tower
turned from its own proper colours to grey and from grey to black, the
room became perfectly dark and the end of the cigar a deep fiery red,
but still Mr Quilp went on smoking and drinking in the same position,
and staring listlessly out of window with the doglike smile always on
his face, save when Mrs Quilp made some involuntary movement of
restlessness or fatigue; and then it expanded into a grin of delight.

CHAPTER 5

Whether Mr Quilp took any sleep by snatches of a few winks at a time,
or whether he sat with his eyes wide open all night long, certain it is
that he kept his cigar alight, and kindled every fresh one from the
ashes of that which was nearly consumed, without requiring the
assistance of a candle. Nor did the striking of the clocks, hour after
hour, appear to inspire him with any sense of drowsiness or any natural
desire to go to rest, but rather to increase his wakefulness, which he
showed, at every such indication of the progress of the night, by a
suppressed cackling in his throat, and a motion of his shoulders, like
one who laughs heartily but the same time slyly and by stealth.

At length the day broke, and poor Mrs Quilp, shivering with cold of
early morning and harassed by fatigue and want of sleep, was discovered
sitting patiently on her chair, raising her eyes at intervals in mute
appeal to the compassion and clemency of her lord, and gently reminding
him by an occasion cough that she was still unpardoned and that her
penance had been of long duration. But her dwarfish spouse still smoked
his cigar and drank his rum without heeding her; and it was not until
the sun had some time risen, and the activity and noise of city day
were rife in the street, that he deigned to recognize her presence by
any word or sign. He might not have done so even then, but for certain
impatient tapping at the door he seemed to denote that some pretty hard
knuckles were actively engaged upon the other side.

‘Why dear me!’ he said looking round with a malicious grin, ‘it’s day.
Open the door, sweet Mrs Quilp!’

His obedient wife withdrew the bolt, and her lady mother entered.

Now, Mrs Jiniwin bounced into the room with great impetuosity; for,
supposing her son-in-law to be still a-bed, she had come to relieve her
feelings by pronouncing a strong opinion upon his general conduct and
character. Seeing that he was up and dressed, and that the room
appeared to have been occupied ever since she quitted it on the
previous evening, she stopped short, in some embarrassment.

Nothing escaped the hawk’s eye of the ugly little man, who, perfectly
understanding what passed in the old lady’s mind, turned uglier still
in the fulness of his satisfaction, and bade her good morning, with a
leer or triumph.

‘Why, Betsy,’ said the old woman, ‘you haven’t been--you don’t mean to
say you’ve been a--’

‘Sitting up all night?’ said Quilp, supplying the conclusion of the
sentence. ‘Yes she has!’

‘All night?’ cried Mrs Jiniwin.

‘Ay, all night. Is the dear old lady deaf?’ said Quilp, with a smile of
which a frown was part. ‘Who says man and wife are bad company?  Ha ha!
The time has flown.’

‘You’re a brute!’ exclaimed Mrs Jiniwin.

‘Come come,’ said Quilp, wilfully misunderstanding her, of course, ‘you
mustn’t call her names. She’s married now, you know. And though she did
beguile the time and keep me from my bed, you must not be so tenderly
careful of me as to be out of humour with her.  Bless you for a dear
old lady. Here’s to your health!’

‘I am much obliged to you,’ returned the old woman, testifying by a
certain restlessness in her hands a vehement desire to shake her
matronly fist at her son-in-law. ‘Oh! I’m very much obliged to you!’

‘Grateful soul!’ cried the dwarf. ‘Mrs Quilp.’

‘Yes, Quilp,’ said the timid sufferer.

‘Help your mother to get breakfast, Mrs Quilp. I am going to the wharf
this morning--the earlier the better, so be quick.’

Mrs Jiniwin made a faint demonstration of rebellion by sitting down in
a chair near the door and folding her arms as if in a resolute
determination to do nothing. But a few whispered words from her
daughter, and a kind inquiry from her son-in-law whether she felt
faint, with a hint that there was abundance of cold water in the next
apartment, routed these symptoms effectually, and she applied herself
to the prescribed preparations with sullen diligence.

While they were in progress, Mr Quilp withdrew to the adjoining room,
and, turning back his coat-collar, proceeded to smear his countenance
with a damp towel of very unwholesome appearance, which made his
complexion rather more cloudy than it was before.  But, while he was
thus engaged, his caution and inquisitiveness did not forsake him, for
with a face as sharp and cunning as ever, he often stopped, even in
this short process, and stood listening for any conversation in the
next room, of which he might be the theme.

‘Ah!’ he said after a short effort of attention, ‘it was not the towel
over my ears, I thought it wasn’t. I’m a little hunchy villain and a
monster, am I, Mrs Jiniwin? Oh!’

The pleasure of this discovery called up the old doglike smile in full
force. When he had quite done with it, he shook himself in a very
doglike manner, and rejoined the ladies.

Mr Quilp now walked up to front of a looking-glass, and was standing
there putting on his neckerchief, when Mrs Jiniwin happening to be
behind him, could not resist the inclination she felt to shake her fist
at her tyrant son-in-law. It was the gesture of an instant, but as she
did so and accompanied the action with a menacing look, she met his eye
in the glass, catching her in the very act. The same glance at the
mirror conveyed to her the reflection of a horribly grotesque and
distorted face with the tongue lolling out; and the next instant the
dwarf, turning about with a perfectly bland and placid look, inquired
in a tone of great affection.

‘How are you now, my dear old darling?’

Slight and ridiculous as the incident was, it made him appear such a
little fiend, and withal such a keen and knowing one, that the old
woman felt too much afraid of him to utter a single word, and suffered
herself to be led with extraordinary politeness to the breakfast-table.
Here he by no means diminished the impression he had just produced, for
he ate hard eggs, shell and all, devoured gigantic prawns with the
heads and tails on, chewed tobacco and water-cresses at the same time
and with extraordinary greediness, drank boiling tea without winking,
bit his fork and spoon till they bent again, and in short performed so
many horrifying and uncommon acts that the women were nearly frightened
out of their wits, and began to doubt if he were really a human
creature. At last, having gone through these proceedings and many
others which were equally a part of his system, Mr Quilp left them,
reduced to a very obedient and humbled state, and betook himself to the
river-side, where he took boat for the wharf on which he had bestowed
his name.

It was flood tide when Daniel Quilp sat himself down in the ferry to
cross to the opposite shore. A fleet of barges were coming lazily on,
some sideways, some head first, some stern first; all in a
wrong-headed, dogged, obstinate way, bumping up against the larger
craft, running under the bows of steamboats, getting into every kind of
nook and corner where they had no business, and being crunched on all
sides like so many walnut-shells; while each with its pair of long
sweeps struggling and splashing in the water looked like some lumbering
fish in pain. In some of the vessels at anchor all hands were busily
engaged in coiling ropes, spreading out sails to dry, taking in or
discharging their cargoes; in others no life was visible but two or
three tarry boys, and perhaps a barking dog running to and fro upon the
deck or scrambling up to look over the side and bark the louder for the
view. Coming slowly on through the forests of masts was a great
steamship, beating the water in short impatient strokes with her heavy
paddles as though she wanted room to breathe, and advancing in her huge
bulk like a sea monster among the minnows of the Thames. On either hand
were long black tiers of colliers; between them vessels slowly working
out of harbour with sails glistening in the sun, and creaking noise on
board, re-echoed from a hundred quarters. The water and all upon it was
in active motion, dancing and buoyant and bubbling up; while the old
grey Tower and piles of building on the shore, with many a church-spire
shooting up between, looked coldly on, and seemed to disdain their
chafing, restless neighbour.

Daniel Quilp, who was not much affected by a bright morning save in so
far as it spared him the trouble of carrying an umbrella, caused
himself to be put ashore hard by the wharf, and proceeded thither
through a narrow lane which, partaking of the amphibious character of
its frequenters, had as much water as mud in its composition, and a
very liberal supply of both. Arrived at his destination, the first
object that presented itself to his view was a pair of very imperfectly
shod feet elevated in the air with the soles upwards, which remarkable
appearance was referable to the boy, who being of an eccentric spirit
and having a natural taste for tumbling, was now standing on his head
and contemplating the aspect of the river under these uncommon
circumstances. He was speedily brought on his heels by the sound of his
master’s voice, and as soon as his head was in its right position, Mr
Quilp, to speak expressively in the absence of a better verb, ‘punched
it’ for him.

‘Come, you let me alone,’ said the boy, parrying Quilp’s hand with both
his elbows alternatively. ‘You’ll get something you won’t like if you
don’t and so I tell you.’

‘You dog,’ snarled Quilp, ‘I’ll beat you with an iron rod, I’ll scratch
you with a rusty nail, I’ll pinch your eyes, if you talk to me--I will.’

With these threats he clenched his hand again, and dexterously diving
in between the elbows and catching the boy’s head as it dodged from
side to side, gave it three or four good hard knocks. Having now
carried his point and insisted on it, he left off.

‘You won’t do it agin,’ said the boy, nodding his head and drawing
back, with the elbows ready in case of the worst; ‘now--’

‘Stand still, you dog,’ said Quilp. ‘I won’t do it again, because I’ve
done it as often as I want. Here. Take the key.’

‘Why don’t you hit one of your size?’ said the boy approaching very
slowly.

‘Where is there one of my size, you dog?’ returned Quilp. ‘Take the
key, or I’ll brain you with it’--indeed he gave him a smart tap with
the handle as he spoke. ‘Now, open the counting-house.’

The boy sulkily complied, muttering at first, but desisting when he
looked round and saw that Quilp was following him with a steady look.
And here it may be remarked, that between this boy and the dwarf there
existed a strange kind of mutual liking. How born or bred, and or
nourished upon blows and threats on one side, and retorts and defiances
on the other, is not to the purpose. Quilp would certainly suffer
nobody to contract him but the boy, and the boy would assuredly not
have submitted to be so knocked about by anybody but Quilp, when he had
the power to run away at any time he chose.

‘Now,’ said Quilp, passing into the wooden counting-house, ‘you mind
the wharf. Stand upon your head agin, and I’ll cut one of your feet
off.’

The boy made no answer, but directly Quilp had shut himself in, stood
on his head before the door, then walked on his hands to the back and
stood on his head there, and then to the opposite side and repeated the
performance. There were indeed four sides to the counting-house, but he
avoided that one where the window was, deeming it probable that Quilp
would be looking out of it. This was prudent, for in point of fact, the
dwarf, knowing his disposition, was lying in wait at a little distance
from the sash armed with a large piece of wood, which, being rough and
jagged and studded in many parts with broken nails, might possibly have
hurt him.

It was a dirty little box, this counting-house, with nothing in it but
an old ricketty desk and two stools, a hat-peg, an ancient almanack, an
inkstand with no ink, and the stump of one pen, and an eight-day clock
which hadn’t gone for eighteen years at least, and of which the
minute-hand had been twisted off for a tooth-pick. Daniel Quilp pulled
his hat over his brows, climbed on to the desk (which had a flat top)
and stretching his short length upon it went to sleep with ease of an
old practitioner; intending, no doubt, to compensate himself for the
deprivation of last night’s rest, by a long and sound nap.

Sound it might have been, but long it was not, for he had not been
asleep a quarter of an hour when the boy opened the door and thrust in
his head, which was like a bundle of badly-picked oakum. Quilp was a
light sleeper and started up directly.

‘Here’s somebody for you,’ said the boy.

‘Who?’

‘I don’t know.’

‘Ask!’ said Quilp, seizing the trifle of wood before mentioned and
throwing it at him with such dexterity that it was well the boy
disappeared before it reached the spot on which he had stood. ‘Ask, you
dog.’

Not caring to venture within range of such missles again, the boy
discreetly sent in his stead the first cause of the interruption, who
now presented herself at the door.

‘What, Nelly!’ cried Quilp.

‘Yes,’ said the child, hesitating whether to enter or retreat, for the
dwarf just roused, with his dishevelled hair hanging all about him and
a yellow handkerchief over his head, was something fearful to behold;
it’s only me, sir.’

‘Come in,’ said Quilp, without getting off the desk. ‘Come in. Stay.
Just look out into the yard, and see whether there’s a boy standing on
his head.’

‘No, sir,’ replied Nell. ‘He’s on his feet.’

‘You’re sure he is?’ said Quilp. ‘Well. Now, come in and shut the door.
What’s your message, Nelly?’

The child handed him a letter. Mr Quilp, without changing his position
further than to turn over a little more on his side and rest his chin
on his hand, proceeded to make himself acquainted with its contents.




CHAPTER 6

Little Nell stood timidly by, with her eyes raised to the countenance
of Mr Quilp as he read the letter, plainly showing by her looks that
while she entertained some fear and distrust of the little man, she was
much inclined to laugh at his uncouth appearance and grotesque
attitude. And yet there was visible on the part of the child a painful
anxiety for his reply, and consciousness of his power to render it
disagreeable or distressing, which was strongly at variance with this
impulse and restrained it more effectually than she could possibly have
done by any efforts of her own.

That Mr Quilp was himself perplexed, and that in no small degree, by
the contents of the letter, was sufficiently obvious. Before he had got
through the first two or three lines he began to open his eyes very
wide and to frown most horribly, the next two or three caused him to
scratch his head in an uncommonly vicious manner, and when he came to
the conclusion he gave a long dismal whistle indicative of surprise and
dismay. After folding and laying it down beside him, he bit the nails
of all of his ten fingers with extreme voracity; and taking it up
sharply, read it again. The second perusal was to all appearance as
unsatisfactory as the first, and plunged him into a profound reverie
from which he awakened to another assault upon his nails and a long
stare at the child, who with her eyes turned towards the ground awaited
his further pleasure.

‘Halloa here!’ he said at length, in a voice, and with a suddenness,
which made the child start as though a gun had been fired off at her
ear. ‘Nelly!’

‘Yes, sir.’

‘Do you know what’s inside this letter, Nell?’

‘No, sir!’

‘Are you sure, quite sure, quite certain, upon your soul?’

‘Quite sure, sir.’

‘Do you wish you may die if you do know, hey?’ said the dwarf.

‘Indeed I don’t know,’ returned the child.

‘Well!’ muttered Quilp as he marked her earnest look. ‘I believe you.
Humph! Gone already? Gone in four-and-twenty hours! What the devil has
he done with it, that’s the mystery!’

This reflection set him scratching his head and biting his nails once
more. While he was thus employed his features gradually relaxed into
what was with him a cheerful smile, but which in any other man would
have been a ghastly grin of pain, and when the child looked up again
she found that he was regarding her with extraordinary favour and
complacency.

‘You look very pretty to-day, Nelly, charmingly pretty. Are you tired,
Nelly?’

‘No, sir. I’m in a hurry to get back, for he will be anxious while I am
away.’

‘There’s no hurry, little Nell, no hurry at all,’ said Quilp. ‘How
should you like to be my number two, Nelly?’

‘To be what, sir?’

‘My number two, Nelly, my second, my Mrs Quilp,’ said the dwarf.

The child looked frightened, but seemed not to understand him, which Mr
Quilp observing, hastened to make his meaning more distinctly.

‘To be Mrs Quilp the second, when Mrs Quilp the first is dead, sweet
Nell,’ said Quilp, wrinkling up his eyes and luring her towards him
with his bent forefinger, ‘to be my wife, my little cherry-cheeked,
red-lipped wife. Say that Mrs Quilp lives five year, or only four,
you’ll be just the proper age for me. Ha ha! Be a good girl, Nelly, a
very good girl, and see if one of these days you don’t come to be Mrs
Quilp of Tower Hill.’

So far from being sustained and stimulated by this delightful prospect,
the child shrank from him in great agitation, and trembled violently.
Mr Quilp, either because frightening anybody afforded him a
constitutional delight, or because it was pleasant to contemplate the
death of Mrs Quilp number one, and the elevation of Mrs Quilp number
two to her post and title, or because he was determined from purposes
of his own to be agreeable and good-humoured at that particular time,
only laughed and feigned to take no heed of her alarm.

‘You shall come with me to Tower Hill and see Mrs Quilp that is,
directly,’ said the dwarf. ‘She’s very fond of you, Nell, though not so
fond as I am. You shall come home with me.’

‘I must go back indeed,’ said the child. ‘He told me to return directly
I had the answer.’

‘But you haven’t it, Nelly,’ retorted the dwarf, ‘and won’t have it,
and can’t have it, until I have been home, so you see that to do your
errand, you must go with me. Reach me yonder hat, my dear, and we’ll go
directly.’ With that, Mr Quilp suffered himself to roll gradually off
the desk until his short legs touched the ground, when he got upon them
and led the way from the counting-house to the wharf outside, when the
first objects that presented themselves were the boy who had stood on
his head and another young gentleman of about his own stature, rolling
in the mud together, locked in a tight embrace, and cuffing each other
with mutual heartiness.

‘It’s Kit!’ cried Nelly, clasping her hand, ‘poor Kit who came with me!
Oh, pray stop them, Mr Quilp!’

‘I’ll stop ‘em,’ cried Quilp, diving into the little counting-house and
returning with a thick stick, ‘I’ll stop ‘em. Now, my boys, fight away.
I’ll fight you both. I’ll take both of you, both together, both
together!’

With which defiances the dwarf flourished his cudgel, and dancing round
the combatants and treading upon them and skipping over them, in a kind
of frenzy, laid about him, now on one and now on the other, in a most
desperate manner, always aiming at their heads and dealing such blows
as none but the veriest little savage would have inflicted. This being
warmer work than they had calculated upon, speedily cooled the courage
of the belligerents, who scrambled to their feet and called for quarter.

‘I’ll beat you to a pulp, you dogs,’ said Quilp, vainly endeavoring to
get near either of them for a parting blow. ‘I’ll bruise you until
you’re copper-coloured, I’ll break your faces till you haven’t a
profile between you, I will.’

‘Come, you drop that stick or it’ll be worse for you,’ said his boy,
dodging round him and watching an opportunity to rush in; ‘you drop
that stick.’

‘Come a little nearer, and I’ll drop it on your skull, you dog,’ said
Quilp, with gleaming eyes; ‘a little nearer--nearer yet.’

But the boy declined the invitation until his master was apparently a
little off his guard, when he darted in and seizing the weapon tried to
wrest it from his grasp. Quilp, who was as strong as a lion, easily
kept his hold until the boy was tugging at it with his utmost power,
when he suddenly let it go and sent him reeling backwards, so that he
fell violently upon his head. The success of this manoeuvre tickled Mr
Quilp beyond description, and he laughed and stamped upon the ground as
at a most irresistible jest.

‘Never mind,’ said the boy, nodding his head and rubbing it at the same
time; ‘you see if ever I offer to strike anybody again because they say
you’re an uglier dwarf than can be seen anywheres for a penny, that’s
all.’

‘Do you mean to say, I’m not, you dog?’ returned Quilp.

‘No!’ retorted the boy.

‘Then what do you fight on my wharf for, you villain?’ said Quilp.

‘Because he said so,’ replied the boy, pointing to Kit, ‘not because you
an’t.’

‘Then why did he say,’ bawled Kit, ‘that Miss Nelly was ugly, and that
she and my master was obliged to do whatever his master liked?  Why did
he say that?’

‘He said what he did because he’s a fool, and you said what you did
because you’re very wise and clever--almost too clever to live, unless
you’re very careful of yourself, Kit.’ said Quilp, with great suavity
in his manner, but still more of quiet malice about his eyes and mouth.
‘Here’s sixpence for you, Kit. Always speak the truth.  At all times,
Kit, speak the truth. Lock the counting-house, you dog, and bring me
the key.’

The other boy, to whom this order was addressed, did as he was told,
and was rewarded for his partizanship in behalf of his master, by a
dexterous rap on the nose with the key, which brought the water into
his eyes. Then Mr Quilp departed with the child and Kit in a boat, and
the boy revenged himself by dancing on his head at intervals on the
extreme verge of the wharf, during the whole time they crossed the
river.

There was only Mrs Quilp at home, and she, little expecting the return
of her lord, was just composing herself for a refreshing slumber when
the sound of his footsteps roused her. She had barely time to seem to
be occupied in some needle-work, when he entered, accompanied by the
child; having left Kit downstairs.

‘Here’s Nelly Trent, dear Mrs Quilp,’ said her husband. ‘A glass of
wine, my dear, and a biscuit, for she has had a long walk. She’ll sit
with you, my soul, while I write a letter.’

Mrs Quilp looked tremblingly in her spouse’s face to know what this
unusual courtesy might portend, and obedient to the summons she saw in
his gesture, followed him into the next room.

‘Mind what I say to you,’ whispered Quilp. ‘See if you can get out of
her anything about her grandfather, or what they do, or how they live,
or what he tells her. I’ve my reasons for knowing, if I can. You women
talk more freely to one another than you do to us, and you have a soft,
mild way with you that’ll win upon her. Do you hear?’

‘Yes, Quilp.’

‘Go then. What’s the matter now?’

‘Dear Quilp,’ faltered his wife. ‘I love the child--if you could do
without making me deceive her--’

The dwarf muttering a terrible oath looked round as if for some weapon
with which to inflict condign punishment upon his disobedient wife. The
submissive little woman hurriedly entreated him not to be angry, and
promised to do as he bade her.

‘Do you hear me,’ whispered Quilp, nipping and pinching her arm; ‘worm
yourself into her secrets; I know you can. I’m listening, recollect. If
you’re not sharp enough, I’ll creak the door, and woe betide you if I
have to creak it much. Go!’

Mrs Quilp departed according to order, and her amiable husband,
ensconcing himself behind the partly opened door, and applying his ear
close to it, began to listen with a face of great craftiness and
attention.

Poor Mrs Quilp was thinking, however, in what manner to begin or what
kind of inquiries she could make; and it was not until the door,
creaking in a very urgent manner, warned her to proceed without further
consideration, that the sound of her voice was heard.

‘How very often you have come backwards and forwards lately to Mr
Quilp, my dear.’

‘I have said so to grandfather, a hundred times,’ returned Nell
innocently.

‘And what has he said to that?’

‘Only sighed, and dropped his head, and seemed so sad and wretched that
if you could have seen him I am sure you must have cried; you could not
have helped it more than I, I know. How that door creaks!’

‘It often does.’ returned Mrs Quilp, with an uneasy glance towards it.
‘But your grandfather--he used not to be so wretched?’

‘Oh, no!’ said the child eagerly, ‘so different! We were once so happy
and he so cheerful and contented! You cannot think what a sad change
has fallen on us since.’

‘I am very, very sorry, to hear you speak like this, my dear!’ said Mrs
Quilp. And she spoke the truth.

‘Thank you,’ returned the child, kissing her cheek, ‘you are always
kind to me, and it is a pleasure to talk to you. I can speak to no one
else about him, but poor Kit. I am very happy still, I ought to feel
happier perhaps than I do, but you cannot think how it grieves me
sometimes to see him alter so.’

‘He’ll alter again, Nelly,’ said Mrs Quilp, ‘and be what he was before.’

‘Oh, if God would only let that come about!’ said the child with
streaming eyes; ‘but it is a long time now, since he first began to--I
thought I saw that door moving!’

‘It’s the wind,’ said Mrs Quilp, faintly. ‘Began to--’

‘To be so thoughtful and dejected, and to forget our old way of
spending the time in the long evenings,’ said the child. ‘I used to
read to him by the fireside, and he sat listening, and when I stopped
and we began to talk, he told me about my mother, and how she once
looked and spoke just like me when she was a little child. Then he used
to take me on his knee, and try to make me understand that she was not
lying in her grave, but had flown to a beautiful country beyond the sky
where nothing died or ever grew old--we were very happy once!’

‘Nelly, Nelly!’ said the poor woman, ‘I can’t bear to see one as young
as you so sorrowful. Pray don’t cry.’

‘I do so very seldom,’ said Nell, ‘but I have kept this to myself a
long time, and I am not quite well, I think, for the tears come into my
eyes and I cannot keep them back. I don’t mind telling you my grief,
for I know you will not tell it to any one again.’

Mrs Quilp turned away her head and made no answer.

‘Then,’ said the child, ‘we often walked in the fields and among the
green trees, and when we came home at night, we liked it better for
being tired, and said what a happy place it was. And if it was dark and
rather dull, we used to say, what did it matter to us, for it only made
us remember our last walk with greater pleasure, and look forward to
our next one. But now we never have these walks, and though it is the
same house it is darker and much more gloomy than it used to be,
indeed!’

She paused here, but though the door creaked more than once, Mrs Quilp
said nothing.

‘Mind you don’t suppose,’ said the child earnestly, ‘that grandfather
is less kind to me than he was. I think he loves me better every day,
and is kinder and more affectionate than he was the day before. You do
not know how fond he is of me!’

‘I am sure he loves you dearly,’ said Mrs Quilp.

‘Indeed, indeed he does!’ cried Nell, ‘as dearly as I love him. But I
have not told you the greatest change of all, and this you must never
breathe again to any one. He has no sleep or rest, but that which he
takes by day in his easy chair; for every night and nearly all night
long he is away from home.’

‘Nelly!’

‘Hush!’ said the child, laying her finger on her lip and looking round.
‘When he comes home in the morning, which is generally just before day,
I let him in. Last night he was very late, and it was quite light. I
saw that his face was deadly pale, that his eyes were bloodshot, and
that his legs trembled as he walked. When I had gone to bed again, I
heard him groan. I got up and ran back to him, and heard him say,
before he knew that I was there, that he could not bear his life much
longer, and if it was not for the child, would wish to die. What shall
I do! Oh! What shall I do!’

The fountains of her heart were opened; the child, overpowered by the
weight of her sorrows and anxieties, by the first confidence she had
ever shown, and the sympathy with which her little tale had been
received, hid her face in the arms of her helpless friend, and burst
into a passion of tears.

In a few minutes Mr Quilp returned, and expressed the utmost surprise
to find her in this condition, which he did very naturally and with
admirable effect, for that kind of acting had been rendered familiar to
him by long practice, and he was quite at home in it.

‘She’s tired you see, Mrs Quilp,’ said the dwarf, squinting in a
hideous manner to imply that his wife was to follow his lead. ‘It’s a
long way from her home to the wharf, and then she was alarmed to see a
couple of young scoundrels fighting, and was timorous on the water
besides. All this together has been too much for her. Poor Nell!’

Mr Quilp unintentionally adopted the very best means he could have
devised for the recovery of his young visitor, by patting her on the
head. Such an application from any other hand might not have produced a
remarkable effect, but the child shrank so quickly from his touch and
felt such an instinctive desire to get out of his reach, that she rose
directly and declared herself ready to return.

‘But you’d better wait, and dine with Mrs Quilp and me.’ said the dwarf.

‘I have been away too long, sir, already,’ returned Nell, drying her
eyes.

‘Well,’ said Mr Quilp, ‘if you will go, you will, Nelly. Here’s the
note. It’s only to say that I shall see him to-morrow or maybe next
day, and that I couldn’t do that little business for him this morning.
Good-bye, Nelly. Here, you sir; take care of her, d’ye hear?’

Kit, who appeared at the summons, deigned to make no reply to so
needless an injunction, and after staring at Quilp in a threatening
manner, as if he doubted whether he might not have been the cause of
Nelly shedding tears, and felt more than half disposed to revenge the
fact upon him on the mere suspicion, turned about and followed his
young mistress, who had by this time taken her leave of Mrs Quilp and
departed.

‘You’re a keen questioner, an’t you, Mrs Quilp?’ said the dwarf,
turning upon her as soon as they were left alone.

‘What more could I do?’ returned his wife mildly.

‘What more could you do!’ sneered Quilp, ‘couldn’t you have done
something less? Couldn’t you have done what you had to do, without
appearing in your favourite part of the crocodile, you minx?’

‘I am very sorry for the child, Quilp,’ said his wife. ‘Surely I’ve
done enough. I’ve led her on to tell her secret she supposed we were
alone; and you were by, God forgive me.’

‘You led her on! You did a great deal truly!’ said Quilp. ‘What did I
tell you about making me creak the door? It’s lucky for you that from
what she let fall, I’ve got the clue I want, for if I hadn’t, I’d have
visited the failure upon you, I can tell you.’

Mrs Quilp being fully persuaded of this, made no reply. Her husband
added with some exultation,

‘But you may thank your fortunate stars--the same stars that made you
Mrs Quilp--you may thank them that I’m upon the old gentleman’s track,
and have got a new light. So let me hear no more about this matter now
or at any other time, and don’t get anything too nice for dinner, for I
shan’t be home to it.’

So saying, Mr Quilp put his hat on and took himself off, and Mrs Quilp,
who was afflicted beyond measure by the recollection of the part she
had just acted, shut herself up in her chamber, and smothering her head
in the bed-clothes bemoaned her fault more bitterly than many less
tender-hearted persons would have mourned a much greater offence; for,
in the majority of cases, conscience is an elastic and very flexible
article, which will bear a deal of stretching and adapt itself to a
great variety of circumstances. Some people by prudent management and
leaving it off piece by piece like a flannel waistcoat in warm weather,
even contrive, in time, to dispense with it altogether; but there be
others who can assume the garment and throw it off at pleasure; and
this, being the greatest and most convenient improvement, is the one
most in vogue.




CHAPTER 7

‘Fred,’ said Mr Swiveller, ‘remember the once popular melody of Begone
dull care; fan the sinking flame of hilarity with the wing of
friendship; and pass the rosy wine.’

Mr Richard Swiveller’s apartments were in the neighbourhood of Drury
Lane, and in addition to this convenience of situation had the
advantage of being over a tobacconist’s shop, so that he was enabled to
procure a refreshing sneeze at any time by merely stepping out upon the
staircase, and was saved the trouble and expense of maintaining a
snuff-box. It was in these apartments that Mr Swiveller made use of the
expressions above recorded for the consolation and encouragement of his
desponding friend; and it may not be uninteresting or improper to
remark that even these brief observations partook in a double sense of
the figurative and poetical character of Mr Swiveller’s mind, as the
rosy wine was in fact represented by one glass of cold gin-and-water,
which was replenished as occasion required from a bottle and jug upon
the table, and was passed from one to another, in a scarcity of
tumblers which, as Mr Swiveller’s was a bachelor’s establishment, may
be acknowledged without a blush. By a like pleasant fiction his single
chamber was always mentioned in a plural number. In its disengaged
times, the tobacconist had announced it in his window as ‘apartments’
for a single gentleman, and Mr Swiveller, following up the hint, never
failed to speak of it as his rooms, his lodgings, or his chambers,
conveying to his hearers a notion of indefinite space, and leaving
their imaginations to wander through long suites of lofty halls, at
pleasure.

In this flight of fancy, Mr Swiveller was assisted by a deceptive piece
of furniture, in reality a bedstead, but in semblance a bookcase, which
occupied a prominent situation in his chamber and seemed to defy
suspicion and challenge inquiry. There is no doubt that by day Mr
Swiveller firmly believed this secret convenience to be a bookcase and
nothing more; that he closed his eyes to the bed, resolutely denied the
existence of the blankets, and spurned the bolster from his thoughts.
No word of its real use, no hint of its nightly service, no allusion to
its peculiar properties, had ever passed between him and his most
intimate friends. Implicit faith in the deception was the first article
of his creed. To be the friend of Swiveller you must reject all
circumstantial evidence, all reason, observation, and experience, and
repose a blind belief in the bookcase. It was his pet weakness, and he
cherished it.

‘Fred!’ said Mr Swiveller, finding that his former adjuration had been
productive of no effect. ‘Pass the rosy.’

Young Trent with an impatient gesture pushed the glass towards him, and
fell again in the moody attitude from which he had been unwillingly
roused.

‘I’ll give you, Fred,’ said his friend, stirring the mixture, ‘a little
sentiment appropriate to the occasion. Here’s May the--’

‘Pshaw!’ interposed the other. ‘You worry me to death with your
chattering. You can be merry under any circumstances.’

‘Why, Mr Trent,’ returned Dick, ‘there is a proverb which talks about
being merry and wise. There are some people who can be merry and can’t
be wise, and some who can be wise (or think they can) and can’t be
merry. I’m one of the first sort. If the proverb’s a good ‘un, I
suppose it’s better to keep to half of it than none; at all events, I’d
rather be merry and not wise, than like you, neither one nor t’other.’

‘Bah!’ muttered his friend, peevishly.

‘With all my heart,’ said Mr Swiveller. ‘In the polite circles I
believe this sort of thing isn’t usually said to a gentleman in his own
apartments, but never mind that. Make yourself at home,’ adding to this
retort an observation to the effect that his friend appeared to be
rather ‘cranky’ in point of temper, Richard Swiveller finished the
rosy and applied himself to the composition of another glassful, in
which, after tasting it with great relish, he proposed a toast to an
imaginary company.

‘Gentlemen, I’ll give you, if you please, Success to the ancient family
of the Swivellers, and good luck to Mr Richard in particular--Mr
Richard, gentlemen,’ said Dick with great emphasis, ‘who spends all his
money on his friends and is Bah!’d for his pains. Hear, hear!’

‘Dick!’ said the other, returning to his seat after having paced the
room twice or thrice, ‘will you talk seriously for two minutes, if I
show you a way to make your fortune with very little trouble?’

‘You’ve shown me so many,’ returned Dick; ‘and nothing has come of any
one of ‘em but empty pockets--’

‘You’ll tell a different story of this one, before a very long time is
over,’ said his companion, drawing his chair to the table. ‘You saw my
sister Nell?’

‘What about her?’ returned Dick.

‘She has a pretty face, has she not?’

‘Why, certainly,’ replied Dick. ‘I must say for her that there’s not
any very strong family likeness between her and you.’

‘Has she a pretty face,’ repeated his friend impatiently.

‘Yes,’ said Dick, ‘she has a pretty face, a very pretty face. What of
that?’

‘I’ll tell you,’ returned his friend. ‘It’s very plain that the old man
and I will remain at daggers drawn to the end of our lives, and that I
have nothing to expect from him. You see that, I suppose?’

‘A bat might see that, with the sun shining,’ said Dick.

‘It’s equally plain that the money which the old flint--rot him--first
taught me to expect that I should share with her at his death, will all
be hers, is it not?’

‘I should said it was,’ replied Dick; ‘unless the way in which I put
the case to him, made an impression. It may have done so. It was
powerful, Fred. ‘Here is a jolly old grandfather’--that was strong, I
thought--very friendly and natural. Did it strike you in that way?’

‘It didn’t strike him,’ returned the other, ‘so we needn’t discuss it.
Now look here. Nell is nearly fourteen.’

‘Fine girl of her age, but small,’ observed Richard Swiveller
parenthetically.

‘If I am to go on, be quiet for one minute,’ returned Trent, fretting
at the slight interest the other appeared to take in the conversation.
‘Now I’m coming to the point.’

‘That’s right,’ said Dick.

‘The girl has strong affections, and brought up as she has been, may,
at her age, be easily influenced and persuaded. If I take her in hand,
I will be bound by a very little coaxing and threatening to bend her to
my will. Not to beat about the bush (for the advantages of the scheme
would take a week to tell) what’s to prevent your marrying her?’

Richard Swiveller, who had been looking over the rim of the tumbler
while his companion addressed the foregoing remarks to him with great
energy and earnestness of manner, no sooner heard these words than he
evinced the utmost consternation, and with difficulty ejaculated the
monosyllable:

‘What!’

‘I say, what’s to prevent,’ repeated the other with a steadiness of
manner, of the effect of which upon his companion he was well assured
by long experience, ‘what’s to prevent your marrying her?’

‘And she “nearly fourteen”!’ cried Dick.

‘I don’t mean marrying her now’--returned the brother angrily; ‘say in
two year’s time, in three, in four. Does the old man look like a
long-liver?’

‘He don’t look like it,’ said Dick shaking his head, ‘but these old
people--there’s no trusting them, Fred. There’s an aunt of mine down in
Dorsetshire that was going to die when I was eight years old, and
hasn’t kept her word yet. They’re so aggravating, so unprincipled, so
spiteful--unless there’s apoplexy in the family, Fred, you can’t
calculate upon ‘em, and even then they deceive you just as often as
not.’

‘Look at the worst side of the question then,’ said Trent as steadily
as before, and keeping his eyes upon his friend. ‘Suppose he lives.’

‘To be sure,’ said Dick. ‘There’s the rub.’

‘I say,’ resumed his friend, ‘suppose he lives, and I persuaded, or if
the word sounds more feasible, forced Nell to a secret marriage with
you. What do you think would come of that?’

‘A family and an annual income of nothing, to keep ‘em on,’ said
Richard Swiveller after some reflection.

‘I tell you,’ returned the other with an increased earnestness, which,
whether it were real or assumed, had the same effect on his companion,
‘that he lives for her, that his whole energies and thoughts are bound
up in her, that he would no more disinherit her for an act of
disobedience than he would take me into his favour again for any act of
obedience or virtue that I could possibly be guilty of. He could not do
it. You or any other man with eyes in his head may see that, if he
chooses.’

‘It seems improbable certainly,’ said Dick, musing.

‘It seems improbable because it is improbable,’ his friend returned.
‘If you would furnish him with an additional inducement to forgive you,
let there be an irreconcilable breach, a most deadly quarrel, between
you and me--let there be a pretense of such a thing, I mean, of
course--and he’ll do fast enough. As to Nell, constant dropping will
wear away a stone; you know you may trust to me as far as she is
concerned. So, whether he lives or dies, what does it come to?  That
you become the sole inheritor of the wealth of this rich old hunks,
that you and I spend it together, and that you get into the bargain a
beautiful young wife.’

‘I suppose there’s no doubt about his being rich’--said Dick.

‘Doubt! Did you hear what he let fall the other day when we were
there? Doubt! What will you doubt next, Dick?’

It would be tedious to pursue the conversation through all its artful
windings, or to develope the gradual approaches by which the heart of
Richard Swiveller was gained. It is sufficient to know that vanity,
interest, poverty, and every spendthrift consideration urged him to
look upon the proposal with favour, and that where all other
inducements were wanting, the habitual carelessness of his disposition
stepped in and still weighed down the scale on the same side. To these
impulses must be added the complete ascendancy which his friend had
long been accustomed to exercise over him--an ascendancy exerted in the
beginning sorely at the expense of his friend’s vices, and was in nine
cases out of ten looked upon as his designing tempter when he was
indeed nothing but his thoughtless, light-headed tool.

The motives on the other side were something deeper than any which
Richard Swiveller entertained or understood, but these being left to
their own development, require no present elucidation. The negotiation
was concluded very pleasantly, and Mr Swiveller was in the act of
stating in flowery terms that he had no insurmountable objection to
marrying anybody plentifully endowed with money or moveables, who could
be induced to take him, when he was interrupted in his observations by
a knock at the door, and the consequent necessity of crying ‘Come in.’

The door was opened, but nothing came in except a soapy arm and a
strong gush of tobacco. The gush of tobacco came from the shop
downstairs, and the soapy arm proceeded from the body of a
servant-girl, who being then and there engaged in cleaning the stairs
had just drawn it out of a warm pail to take in a letter, which letter
she now held in her hand, proclaiming aloud with that quick perception
of surnames peculiar to her class that it was for Mister Snivelling.

Dick looked rather pale and foolish when he glanced at the direction,
and still more so when he came to look at the inside, observing that it
was one of the inconveniences of being a lady’s man, and that it was
very easy to talk as they had been talking, but he had quite forgotten
her.

‘Her. Who?’ demanded Trent.

‘Sophy Wackles,’ said Dick.

‘Who’s she?’

‘She’s all my fancy painted her, sir, that’s what she is,’ said Mr
Swiveller, taking a long pull at ‘the rosy’ and looking gravely at his
friend. ‘She’s lovely, she’s divine. You know her.’

‘I remember,’ said his companion carelessly. ‘What of her?’

‘Why, sir,’ returned Dick, ‘between Miss Sophia Wackles and the humble
individual who has now the honor to address you, warm and tender
sentiments have been engendered, sentiments of the most honourable and
inspiring kind. The Goddess Diana, sir, that calls aloud for the chase,
is not more particular in her behavior than Sophia Wackles; I can tell
you that.’

‘Am I to believe there’s anything real in what you say?’ demanded his
friend; ‘you don’t mean to say that any love-making has been going on?’

‘Love-making, yes. Promising, no,’ said Dick. ‘There can be no action
for breach, that’s one comfort. I’ve never committed myself in writing,
Fred.’

‘And what’s in the letter, pray?’

‘A reminder, Fred, for to-night--a small party of twenty, making two
hundred light fantastic toes in all, supposing every lady and gentleman
to have the proper complement. I must go, if it’s only to begin
breaking off the affair--I’ll do it, don’t you be afraid. I should like
to know whether she left this herself. If she did, unconscious of any
bar to her happiness, it’s affecting, Fred.’

To solve this question, Mr Swiveller summoned the handmaid and
ascertained that Miss Sophy Wackles had indeed left the letter with her
own hands; and that she had come accompanied, for decorum’s sake no
doubt, by a younger Miss Wackles; and that on learning that Mr
Swiveller was at home and being requested to walk upstairs, she was
extremely shocked and professed that she would rather die. Mr Swiveller
heard this account with a degree of admiration not altogether
consistent with the project in which he had just concurred, but his
friend attached very little importance to his behavior in this respect,
probably because he knew that he had influence sufficient to control
Richard Swiveller’s proceedings in this or any other matter, whenever
he deemed it necessary, for the advancement of his own purposes, to
exert it.