Chapter I


As the streets that lead from the Strand to the Embankment are very
narrow, it is better not to walk down them arm-in-arm. If you persist,
lawyers' clerks will have to make flying leaps into the mud; young lady
typists will have to fidget behind you. In the streets of London where
beauty goes unregarded, eccentricity must pay the penalty, and it is
better not to be very tall, to wear a long blue cloak, or to beat the
air with your left hand.

One afternoon in the beginning of October when the traffic was becoming
brisk a tall man strode along the edge of the pavement with a lady on
his arm. Angry glances struck upon their backs. The small, agitated
figures--for in comparison with this couple most people looked
small--decorated with fountain pens, and burdened with despatch-boxes,
had appointments to keep, and drew a weekly salary, so that there
was some reason for the unfriendly stare which was bestowed upon Mr.
Ambrose's height and upon Mrs. Ambrose's cloak. But some enchantment had
put both man and woman beyond the reach of malice and unpopularity. In
his guess one might guess from the moving lips that it was thought; and
in hers from the eyes fixed stonily straight in front of her at a level
above the eyes of most that it was sorrow. It was only by scorning all
she met that she kept herself from tears, and the friction of people
brushing past her was evidently painful. After watching the traffic on
the Embankment for a minute or two with a stoical gaze she twitched her
husband's sleeve, and they crossed between the swift discharge of motor
cars. When they were safe on the further side, she gently withdrew her
arm from his, allowing her mouth at the same time to relax, to tremble;
then tears rolled down, and leaning her elbows on the balustrade, she
shielded her face from the curious. Mr. Ambrose attempted consolation;
he patted her shoulder; but she showed no signs of admitting him, and
feeling it awkward to stand beside a grief that was greater than his, he
crossed his arms behind him, and took a turn along the pavement.

The embankment juts out in angles here and there, like pulpits; instead
of preachers, however, small boys occupy them, dangling string, dropping
pebbles, or launching wads of paper for a cruise. With their sharp eye
for eccentricity, they were inclined to think Mr. Ambrose awful; but
the quickest witted cried "Bluebeard!" as he passed. In case they should
proceed to tease his wife, Mr. Ambrose flourished his stick at them,
upon which they decided that he was grotesque merely, and four instead
of one cried "Bluebeard!" in chorus.

Although Mrs. Ambrose stood quite still, much longer than is natural,
the little boys let her be. Some one is always looking into the river
near Waterloo Bridge; a couple will stand there talking for half an hour
on a fine afternoon; most people, walking for pleasure, contemplate for
three minutes; when, having compared the occasion with other occasions,
or made some sentence, they pass on. Sometimes the flats and churches
and hotels of Westminster are like the outlines of Constantinople in a
mist; sometimes the river is an opulent purple, sometimes mud-coloured,
sometimes sparkling blue like the sea. It is always worth while to look
down and see what is happening. But this lady looked neither up nor
down; the only thing she had seen, since she stood there, was a circular
iridescent patch slowly floating past with a straw in the middle of it.
The straw and the patch swam again and again behind the tremulous medium
of a great welling tear, and the tear rose and fell and dropped into the
river. Then there struck close upon her ears--

     Lars Porsena of Clusium
     By the nine Gods he swore--

and then more faintly, as if the speaker had passed her on his walk--

     That the Great House of Tarquin
     Should suffer wrong no more.

Yes, she knew she must go back to all that, but at present she must
weep. Screening her face she sobbed more steadily than she had yet done,
her shoulders rising and falling with great regularity. It was this
figure that her husband saw when, having reached the polished Sphinx,
having entangled himself with a man selling picture postcards, he
turned; the stanza instantly stopped. He came up to her, laid his hand
on her shoulder, and said, "Dearest." His voice was supplicating. But
she shut her face away from him, as much as to say, "You can't possibly
understand."

As he did not leave her, however, she had to wipe her eyes, and to raise
them to the level of the factory chimneys on the other bank. She saw
also the arches of Waterloo Bridge and the carts moving across them,
like the line of animals in a shooting gallery. They were seen blankly,
but to see anything was of course to end her weeping and begin to walk.

"I would rather walk," she said, her husband having hailed a cab already
occupied by two city men.

The fixity of her mood was broken by the action of walking. The shooting
motor cars, more like spiders in the moon than terrestrial objects, the
thundering drays, the jingling hansoms, and little black broughams,
made her think of the world she lived in. Somewhere up there above the
pinnacles where the smoke rose in a pointed hill, her children were
now asking for her, and getting a soothing reply. As for the mass of
streets, squares, and public buildings which parted them, she only felt
at this moment how little London had done to make her love it, although
thirty of her forty years had been spent in a street. She knew how
to read the people who were passing her; there were the rich who were
running to and from each others' houses at this hour; there were the
bigoted workers driving in a straight line to their offices; there were
the poor who were unhappy and rightly malignant. Already, though there
was sunlight in the haze, tattered old men and women were nodding off
to sleep upon the seats. When one gave up seeing the beauty that clothed
things, this was the skeleton beneath.

A fine rain now made her still more dismal; vans with the odd names
of those engaged in odd industries--Sprules, Manufacturer of Saw-dust;
Grabb, to whom no piece of waste paper comes amiss--fell flat as a bad
joke; bold lovers, sheltered behind one cloak, seemed to her sordid,
past their passion; the flower women, a contented company, whose talk
is always worth hearing, were sodden hags; the red, yellow, and blue
flowers, whose heads were pressed together, would not blaze. Moreover,
her husband walking with a quick rhythmic stride, jerking his free hand
occasionally, was either a Viking or a stricken Nelson; the sea-gulls
had changed his note.

"Ridley, shall we drive? Shall we drive, Ridley?"

Mrs. Ambrose had to speak sharply; by this time he was far away.

The cab, by trotting steadily along the same road, soon withdrew them
from the West End, and plunged them into London. It appeared that this
was a great manufacturing place, where the people were engaged in
making things, as though the West End, with its electric lamps, its vast
plate-glass windows all shining yellow, its carefully-finished houses,
and tiny live figures trotting on the pavement, or bowled along on
wheels in the road, was the finished work. It appeared to her a very
small bit of work for such an enormous factory to have made. For some
reason it appeared to her as a small golden tassel on the edge of a vast
black cloak.

Observing that they passed no other hansom cab, but only vans and
waggons, and that not one of the thousand men and women she saw was
either a gentleman or a lady, Mrs. Ambrose understood that after all
it is the ordinary thing to be poor, and that London is the city of
innumerable poor people. Startled by this discovery and seeing herself
pacing a circle all the days of her life round Picadilly Circus she was
greatly relieved to pass a building put up by the London County Council
for Night Schools.

"Lord, how gloomy it is!" her husband groaned. "Poor creatures!"

What with the misery for her children, the poor, and the rain, her mind
was like a wound exposed to dry in the air.

At this point the cab stopped, for it was in danger of being crushed
like an egg-shell. The wide Embankment which had had room for
cannonballs and squadrons, had now shrunk to a cobbled lane steaming
with smells of malt and oil and blocked by waggons. While her husband
read the placards pasted on the brick announcing the hours at which
certain ships would sail for Scotland, Mrs. Ambrose did her best to find
information. From a world exclusively occupied in feeding waggons with
sacks, half obliterated too in a fine yellow fog, they got neither help
nor attention. It seemed a miracle when an old man approached, guessed
their condition, and proposed to row them out to their ship in the
little boat which he kept moored at the bottom of a flight of steps.
With some hesitation they trusted themselves to him, took their places,
and were soon waving up and down upon the water, London having shrunk
to two lines of buildings on either side of them, square buildings and
oblong buildings placed in rows like a child's avenue of bricks.

The river, which had a certain amount of troubled yellow light in it,
ran with great force; bulky barges floated down swiftly escorted by
tugs; police boats shot past everything; the wind went with the current.
The open rowing-boat in which they sat bobbed and curtseyed across the
line of traffic. In mid-stream the old man stayed his hands upon the
oars, and as the water rushed past them, remarked that once he had taken
many passengers across, where now he took scarcely any. He seemed to
recall an age when his boat, moored among rushes, carried delicate feet
across to lawns at Rotherhithe.

"They want bridges now," he said, indicating the monstrous outline of
the Tower Bridge. Mournfully Helen regarded him, who was putting water
between her and her children. Mournfully she gazed at the ship they were
approaching; anchored in the middle of the stream they could dimly read
her name--_Euphrosyne_.

Very dimly in the falling dusk they could see the lines of the rigging,
the masts and the dark flag which the breeze blew out squarely behind.

As the little boat sidled up to the steamer, and the old man shipped
his oars, he remarked once more pointing above, that ships all the
world over flew that flag the day they sailed. In the minds of both the
passengers the blue flag appeared a sinister token, and this the moment
for presentiments, but nevertheless they rose, gathered their things
together, and climbed on deck.

Down in the saloon of her father's ship, Miss Rachel Vinrace, aged
twenty-four, stood waiting her uncle and aunt nervously. To begin with,
though nearly related, she scarcely remembered them; to go on with, they
were elderly people, and finally, as her father's daughter she must be
in some sort prepared to entertain them. She looked forward to seeing
them as civilised people generally look forward to the first sight of
civilised people, as though they were of the nature of an approaching
physical discomfort--a tight shoe or a draughty window. She was already
unnaturally braced to receive them. As she occupied herself in laying
forks severely straight by the side of knives, she heard a man's voice
saying gloomily:

"On a dark night one would fall down these stairs head foremost," to
which a woman's voice added, "And be killed."

As she spoke the last words the woman stood in the doorway. Tall,
large-eyed, draped in purple shawls, Mrs. Ambrose was romantic and
beautiful; not perhaps sympathetic, for her eyes looked straight and
considered what they saw. Her face was much warmer than a Greek face;
on the other hand it was much bolder than the face of the usual pretty
Englishwoman.

"Oh, Rachel, how d'you do," she said, shaking hands.

"How are you, dear," said Mr. Ambrose, inclining his forehead to be
kissed. His niece instinctively liked his thin angular body, and the big
head with its sweeping features, and the acute, innocent eyes.

"Tell Mr. Pepper," Rachel bade the servant. Husband and wife then sat
down on one side of the table, with their niece opposite to them.

"My father told me to begin," she explained. "He is very busy with the
men. . . . You know Mr. Pepper?"

A little man who was bent as some trees are by a gale on one side of
them had slipped in. Nodding to Mr. Ambrose, he shook hands with Helen.

"Draughts," he said, erecting the collar of his coat.

"You are still rheumatic?" asked Helen. Her voice was low and seductive,
though she spoke absently enough, the sight of town and river being
still present to her mind.

"Once rheumatic, always rheumatic, I fear," he replied. "To some extent
it depends on the weather, though not so much as people are apt to
think."

"One does not die of it, at any rate," said Helen.

"As a general rule--no," said Mr. Pepper.

"Soup, Uncle Ridley?" asked Rachel.

"Thank you, dear," he said, and, as he held his plate out, sighed
audibly, "Ah! she's not like her mother." Helen was just too late in
thumping her tumbler on the table to prevent Rachel from hearing, and
from blushing scarlet with embarrassment.

"The way servants treat flowers!" she said hastily. She drew a green
vase with a crinkled lip towards her, and began pulling out the tight
little chrysanthemums, which she laid on the table-cloth, arranging them
fastidiously side by side.

There was a pause.

"You knew Jenkinson, didn't you, Ambrose?" asked Mr. Pepper across the
table.

"Jenkinson of Peterhouse?"

"He's dead," said Mr. Pepper.

"Ah, dear!--I knew him--ages ago," said Ridley. "He was the hero of the
punt accident, you remember? A queer card. Married a young woman out of
a tobacconist's, and lived in the Fens--never heard what became of him."

"Drink--drugs," said Mr. Pepper with sinister conciseness. "He left a
commentary. Hopeless muddle, I'm told."

"The man had really great abilities," said Ridley.

"His introduction to Jellaby holds its own still," went on Mr. Pepper,
"which is surprising, seeing how text-books change."

"There was a theory about the planets, wasn't there?" asked Ridley.

"A screw loose somewhere, no doubt of it," said Mr. Pepper, shaking his
head.

Now a tremor ran through the table, and a light outside swerved. At the
same time an electric bell rang sharply again and again.

"We're off," said Ridley.

A slight but perceptible wave seemed to roll beneath the floor; then it
sank; then another came, more perceptible. Lights slid right across the
uncurtained window. The ship gave a loud melancholy moan.

"We're off!" said Mr. Pepper. Other ships, as sad as she, answered
her outside on the river. The chuckling and hissing of water could be
plainly heard, and the ship heaved so that the steward bringing plates
had to balance himself as he drew the curtain. There was a pause.

"Jenkinson of Cats--d'you still keep up with him?" asked Ambrose.

"As much as one ever does," said Mr. Pepper. "We meet annually. This
year he has had the misfortune to lose his wife, which made it painful,
of course."

"Very painful," Ridley agreed.

"There's an unmarried daughter who keeps house for him, I believe, but
it's never the same, not at his age."

Both gentlemen nodded sagely as they carved their apples.

"There was a book, wasn't there?" Ridley enquired.

"There _was_ a book, but there never _will_ be a book," said Mr. Pepper
with such fierceness that both ladies looked up at him.

"There never will be a book, because some one else has written it for
him," said Mr. Pepper with considerable acidity. "That's what comes of
putting things off, and collecting fossils, and sticking Norman arches
on one's pigsties."

"I confess I sympathise," said Ridley with a melancholy sigh. "I have a
weakness for people who can't begin."

". . . The accumulations of a lifetime wasted," continued Mr. pepper.
"He had accumulations enough to fill a barn."

"It's a vice that some of us escape," said Ridley. "Our friend Miles has
another work out to-day."

Mr. Pepper gave an acid little laugh. "According to my calculations," he
said, "he has produced two volumes and a half annually, which,
allowing for time spent in the cradle and so forth, shows a commendable
industry."

"Yes, the old Master's saying of him has been pretty well realised,"
said Ridley.

"A way they had," said Mr. Pepper. "You know the Bruce collection?--not
for publication, of course."

"I should suppose not," said Ridley significantly. "For a Divine he
was--remarkably free."

"The Pump in Neville's Row, for example?" enquired Mr. Pepper.

"Precisely," said Ambrose.

Each of the ladies, being after the fashion of their sex, highly trained
in promoting men's talk without listening to it, could think--about the
education of children, about the use of fog sirens in an opera--without
betraying herself. Only it struck Helen that Rachel was perhaps too
still for a hostess, and that she might have done something with her
hands.

"Perhaps--?" she said at length, upon which they rose and left, vaguely
to the surprise of the gentlemen, who had either thought them attentive
or had forgotten their presence.

"Ah, one could tell strange stories of the old days," they heard Ridley
say, as he sank into his chair again. Glancing back, at the doorway,
they saw Mr. Pepper as though he had suddenly loosened his clothes, and
had become a vivacious and malicious old ape.

Winding veils round their heads, the women walked on deck. They were
now moving steadily down the river, passing the dark shapes of ships
at anchor, and London was a swarm of lights with a pale yellow canopy
drooping above it. There were the lights of the great theatres, the
lights of the long streets, lights that indicated huge squares of
domestic comfort, lights that hung high in air. No darkness would
ever settle upon those lamps, as no darkness had settled upon them for
hundreds of years. It seemed dreadful that the town should blaze
for ever in the same spot; dreadful at least to people going away to
adventure upon the sea, and beholding it as a circumscribed mound,
eternally burnt, eternally scarred. From the deck of the ship the great
city appeared a crouched and cowardly figure, a sedentary miser.

Leaning over the rail, side by side, Helen said, "Won't you be cold?"
Rachel replied, "No. . . . How beautiful!" she added a moment later.
Very little was visible--a few masts, a shadow of land here, a line of
brilliant windows there. They tried to make head against the wind.

"It blows--it blows!" gasped Rachel, the words rammed down her throat.
Struggling by her side, Helen was suddenly overcome by the spirit of
movement, and pushed along with her skirts wrapping themselves round
her knees, and both arms to her hair. But slowly the intoxication of
movement died down, and the wind became rough and chilly. They looked
through a chink in the blind and saw that long cigars were being smoked
in the dining-room; they saw Mr. Ambrose throw himself violently against
the back of his chair, while Mr. Pepper crinkled his cheeks as though
they had been cut in wood. The ghost of a roar of laughter came out to
them, and was drowned at once in the wind. In the dry yellow-lighted
room Mr. Pepper and Mr. Ambrose were oblivious of all tumult; they were
in Cambridge, and it was probably about the year 1875.

"They're old friends," said Helen, smiling at the sight. "Now, is there
a room for us to sit in?"

Rachel opened a door.

"It's more like a landing than a room," she said. Indeed it had nothing
of the shut stationary character of a room on shore. A table was rooted
in the middle, and seats were stuck to the sides. Happily the tropical
suns had bleached the tapestries to a faded blue-green colour, and the
mirror with its frame of shells, the work of the steward's love, when
the time hung heavy in the southern seas, was quaint rather than
ugly. Twisted shells with red lips like unicorn's horns ornamented
the mantelpiece, which was draped by a pall of purple plush from which
depended a certain number of balls. Two windows opened on to the deck,
and the light beating through them when the ship was roasted on the
Amazons had turned the prints on the opposite wall to a faint yellow
colour, so that "The Coliseum" was scarcely to be distinguished from
Queen Alexandra playing with her Spaniels. A pair of wicker arm-chairs
by the fireside invited one to warm one's hands at a grate full of gilt
shavings; a great lamp swung above the table--the kind of lamp which
makes the light of civilisation across dark fields to one walking in the
country.

"It's odd that every one should be an old friend of Mr. Pepper's,"
Rachel started nervously, for the situation was difficult, the room
cold, and Helen curiously silent.

"I suppose you take him for granted?" said her aunt.

"He's like this," said Rachel, lighting on a fossilised fish in a basin,
and displaying it.

"I expect you're too severe," Helen remarked.

Rachel immediately tried to qualify what she had said against her
belief.

"I don't really know him," she said, and took refuge in facts, believing
that elderly people really like them better than feelings. She produced
what she knew of William Pepper. She told Helen that he always called on
Sundays when they were at home; he knew about a great many things--about
mathematics, history, Greek, zoology, economics, and the Icelandic
Sagas. He had turned Persian poetry into English prose, and English
prose into Greek iambics; he was an authority upon coins; and--one other
thing--oh yes, she thought it was vehicular traffic.

He was here either to get things out of the sea, or to write upon the
probable course of Odysseus, for Greek after all was his hobby.

"I've got all his pamphlets," she said. "Little pamphlets. Little yellow
books." It did not appear that she had read them.

"Has he ever been in love?" asked Helen, who had chosen a seat.

This was unexpectedly to the point.

"His heart's a piece of old shoe leather," Rachel declared, dropping the
fish. But when questioned she had to own that she had never asked him.

"I shall ask him," said Helen.

"The last time I saw you, you were buying a piano," she continued. "Do
you remember--the piano, the room in the attic, and the great plants
with the prickles?"

"Yes, and my aunts said the piano would come through the floor, but at
their age one wouldn't mind being killed in the night?" she enquired.

"I heard from Aunt Bessie not long ago," Helen stated. "She is afraid
that you will spoil your arms if you insist upon so much practising."

"The muscles of the forearm--and then one won't marry?"

"She didn't put it quite like that," replied Mrs. Ambrose.

"Oh, no--of course she wouldn't," said Rachel with a sigh.

Helen looked at her. Her face was weak rather than decided, saved from
insipidity by the large enquiring eyes; denied beauty, now that she was
sheltered indoors, by the lack of colour and definite outline. Moreover,
a hesitation in speaking, or rather a tendency to use the wrong words,
made her seem more than normally incompetent for her years. Mrs.
Ambrose, who had been speaking much at random, now reflected that she
certainly did not look forward to the intimacy of three or four weeks
on board ship which was threatened. Women of her own age usually boring
her, she supposed that girls would be worse. She glanced at Rachel
again. Yes! how clear it was that she would be vacillating, emotional,
and when you said something to her it would make no more lasting
impression than the stroke of a stick upon water. There was nothing
to take hold of in girls--nothing hard, permanent, satisfactory. Did
Willoughby say three weeks, or did he say four? She tried to remember.

At this point, however, the door opened and a tall burly man entered
the room, came forward and shook Helen's hand with an emotional kind of
heartiness, Willoughby himself, Rachel's father, Helen's brother-in-law.
As a great deal of flesh would have been needed to make a fat man of
him, his frame being so large, he was not fat; his face was a large
framework too, looking, by the smallness of the features and the glow
in the hollow of the cheek, more fitted to withstand assaults of the
weather than to express sentiments and emotions, or to respond to them
in others.

"It is a great pleasure that you have come," he said, "for both of us."

Rachel murmured in obedience to her father's glance.

"We'll do our best to make you comfortable. And Ridley. We think it
an honour to have charge of him. Pepper'll have some one to contradict
him--which I daren't do. You find this child grown, don't you? A young
woman, eh?"

Still holding Helen's hand he drew his arm round Rachel's shoulder, thus
making them come uncomfortably close, but Helen forbore to look.

"You think she does us credit?" he asked.

"Oh yes," said Helen.

"Because we expect great things of her," he continued, squeezing his
daughter's arm and releasing her. "But about you now." They sat down
side by side on the little sofa. "Did you leave the children well?
They'll be ready for school, I suppose. Do they take after you or
Ambrose? They've got good heads on their shoulders, I'll be bound?"

At this Helen immediately brightened more than she had yet done, and
explained that her son was six and her daughter ten. Everybody said that
her boy was like her and her girl like Ridley. As for brains, they were
quick brats, she thought, and modestly she ventured on a little story
about her son,--how left alone for a minute he had taken the pat of
butter in his fingers, run across the room with it, and put it on
the fire--merely for the fun of the thing, a feeling which she could
understand.

"And you had to show the young rascal that these tricks wouldn't do,
eh?"

"A child of six? I don't think they matter."

"I'm an old-fashioned father."

"Nonsense, Willoughby; Rachel knows better."

Much as Willoughby would doubtless have liked his daughter to praise
him she did not; her eyes were unreflecting as water, her fingers still
toying with the fossilised fish, her mind absent. The elder people went
on to speak of arrangements that could be made for Ridley's comfort--a
table placed where he couldn't help looking at the sea, far from
boilers, at the same time sheltered from the view of people passing.
Unless he made this a holiday, when his books were all packed, he
would have no holiday whatever; for out at Santa Marina Helen knew, by
experience, that he would work all day; his boxes, she said, were packed
with books.

"Leave it to me--leave it to me!" said Willoughby, obviously intending
to do much more than she asked of him. But Ridley and Mr. Pepper were
heard fumbling at the door.

"How are you, Vinrace?" said Ridley, extending a limp hand as he came
in, as though the meeting were melancholy to both, but on the whole more
so to him.

Willoughby preserved his heartiness, tempered by respect. For the moment
nothing was said.

"We looked in and saw you laughing," Helen remarked. "Mr. Pepper had
just told a very good story."

"Pish. None of the stories were good," said her husband peevishly.

"Still a severe judge, Ridley?" enquired Mr. Vinrace.

"We bored you so that you left," said Ridley, speaking directly to his
wife.

As this was quite true Helen did not attempt to deny it, and her next
remark, "But didn't they improve after we'd gone?" was unfortunate, for
her husband answered with a droop of his shoulders, "If possible they
got worse."

The situation was now one of considerable discomfort for every one
concerned, as was proved by a long interval of constraint and silence.
Mr. Pepper, indeed, created a diversion of a kind by leaping on to his
seat, both feet tucked under him, with the action of a spinster who
detects a mouse, as the draught struck at his ankles. Drawn up there,
sucking at his cigar, with his arms encircling his knees, he looked
like the image of Buddha, and from this elevation began a discourse,
addressed to nobody, for nobody had called for it, upon the unplumbed
depths of ocean. He professed himself surprised to learn that although
Mr. Vinrace possessed ten ships, regularly plying between London and
Buenos Aires, not one of them was bidden to investigate the great white
monsters of the lower waters.

"No, no," laughed Willoughby, "the monsters of the earth are too many
for me!"

Rachel was heard to sigh, "Poor little goats!"

"If it weren't for the goats there'd be no music, my dear; music depends
upon goats," said her father rather sharply, and Mr. Pepper went on to
describe the white, hairless, blind monsters lying curled on the ridges
of sand at the bottom of the sea, which would explode if you brought
them to the surface, their sides bursting asunder and scattering
entrails to the winds when released from pressure, with considerable
detail and with such show of knowledge, that Ridley was disgusted, and
begged him to stop.

From all this Helen drew her own conclusions, which were gloomy enough.
Pepper was a bore; Rachel was an unlicked girl, no doubt prolific of
confidences, the very first of which would be: "You see, I don't get on
with my father." Willoughby, as usual, loved his business and built his
Empire, and between them all she would be considerably bored. Being a
woman of action, however, she rose, and said that for her part she was
going to bed. At the door she glanced back instinctively at Rachel,
expecting that as two of the same sex they would leave the room
together. Rachel rose, looked vaguely into Helen's face, and remarked
with her slight stammer, "I'm going out to t-t-triumph in the wind."

Mrs. Ambrose's worst suspicions were confirmed; she went down the
passage lurching from side to side, and fending off the wall now
with her right arm, now with her left; at each lurch she exclaimed
emphatically, "Damn!"





Chapter II


Uncomfortable as the night, with its rocking movement, and salt smells,
may have been, and in one case undoubtedly was, for Mr. Pepper had
insufficient clothes upon his bed, the breakfast next morning wore a
kind of beauty. The voyage had begun, and had begun happily with a soft
blue sky, and a calm sea. The sense of untapped resources, things to say
as yet unsaid, made the hour significant, so that in future years the
entire journey perhaps would be represented by this one scene, with the
sound of sirens hooting in the river the night before, somehow mixing
in.

The table was cheerful with apples and bread and eggs. Helen handed
Willoughby the butter, and as she did so cast her eye on him and
reflected, "And she married you, and she was happy, I suppose."

She went off on a familiar train of thought, leading on to all kinds
of well-known reflections, from the old wonder, why Theresa had married
Willoughby?

"Of course, one sees all that," she thought, meaning that one sees that
he is big and burly, and has a great booming voice, and a fist and a
will of his own; "but--" here she slipped into a fine analysis of him
which is best represented by one word, "sentimental," by which she meant
that he was never simple and honest about his feelings. For example, he
seldom spoke of the dead, but kept anniversaries with singular pomp.
She suspected him of nameless atrocities with regard to his daughter, as
indeed she had always suspected him of bullying his wife. Naturally she
fell to comparing her own fortunes with the fortunes of her friend, for
Willoughby's wife had been perhaps the one woman Helen called friend,
and this comparison often made the staple of their talk. Ridley was a
scholar, and Willoughby was a man of business. Ridley was bringing out
the third volume of Pindar when Willoughby was launching his first ship.
They built a new factory the very year the commentary on Aristotle--was
it?--appeared at the University Press. "And Rachel," she looked at
her, meaning, no doubt, to decide the argument, which was otherwise too
evenly balanced, by declaring that Rachel was not comparable to her
own children. "She really might be six years old," was all she said,
however, this judgment referring to the smooth unmarked outline of the
girl's face, and not condemning her otherwise, for if Rachel were ever
to think, feel, laugh, or express herself, instead of dropping milk
from a height as though to see what kind of drops it made, she might be
interesting though never exactly pretty. She was like her mother, as the
image in a pool on a still summer's day is like the vivid flushed face
that hangs over it.

Meanwhile Helen herself was under examination, though not from either of
her victims. Mr. Pepper considered her; and his meditations, carried
on while he cut his toast into bars and neatly buttered them, took him
through a considerable stretch of autobiography. One of his penetrating
glances assured him that he was right last night in judging that Helen
was beautiful. Blandly he passed her the jam. She was talking nonsense,
but not worse nonsense than people usually do talk at breakfast, the
cerebral circulation, as he knew to his cost, being apt to give trouble
at that hour. He went on saying "No" to her, on principle, for he never
yielded to a woman on account of her sex. And here, dropping his eyes
to his plate, he became autobiographical. He had not married himself for
the sufficient reason that he had never met a woman who commanded his
respect. Condemned to pass the susceptible years of youth in a railway
station in Bombay, he had seen only coloured women, military women,
official women; and his ideal was a woman who could read Greek, if not
Persian, was irreproachably fair in the face, and able to understand the
small things he let fall while undressing. As it was he had contracted
habits of which he was not in the least ashamed. Certain odd minutes
every day went to learning things by heart; he never took a ticket
without noting the number; he devoted January to Petronius, February to
Catullus, March to the Etruscan vases perhaps; anyhow he had done good
work in India, and there was nothing to regret in his life except the
fundamental defects which no wise man regrets, when the present is still
his. So concluding he looked up suddenly and smiled. Rachel caught his
eye.

"And now you've chewed something thirty-seven times, I suppose?" she
thought, but said politely aloud, "Are your legs troubling you to-day,
Mr. Pepper?"

"My shoulder blades?" he asked, shifting them painfully. "Beauty has no
effect upon uric acid that I'm aware of," he sighed, contemplating the
round pane opposite, through which the sky and sea showed blue. At the
same time he took a little parchment volume from his pocket and laid it
on the table. As it was clear that he invited comment, Helen asked him
the name of it. She got the name; but she got also a disquisition upon
the proper method of making roads. Beginning with the Greeks, who
had, he said, many difficulties to contend with, he continued with the
Romans, passed to England and the right method, which speedily became
the wrong method, and wound up with such a fury of denunciation
directed against the road-makers of the present day in general, and the
road-makers of Richmond Park in particular, where Mr. Pepper had the
habit of cycling every morning before breakfast, that the spoons fairly
jingled against the coffee cups, and the insides of at least four rolls
mounted in a heap beside Mr. Pepper's plate.

"Pebbles!" he concluded, viciously dropping another bread pellet upon
the heap. "The roads of England are mended with pebbles! 'With the first
heavy rainfall,' I've told 'em, 'your road will be a swamp.' Again and
again my words have proved true. But d'you suppose they listen to me
when I tell 'em so, when I point out the consequences, the consequences
to the public purse, when I recommend 'em to read Coryphaeus? No, Mrs.
Ambrose, you will form no just opinion of the stupidity of mankind until
you have sat upon a Borough Council!" The little man fixed her with a
glance of ferocious energy.

"I have had servants," said Mrs. Ambrose, concentrating her gaze. "At
this moment I have a nurse. She's a good woman as they go, but she's
determined to make my children pray. So far, owing to great care on
my part, they think of God as a kind of walrus; but now that my back's
turned--Ridley," she demanded, swinging round upon her husband, "what
shall we do if we find them saying the Lord's Prayer when we get home
again?"

Ridley made the sound which is represented by "Tush." But Willoughby,
whose discomfort as he listened was manifested by a slight movement
rocking of his body, said awkwardly, "Oh, surely, Helen, a little
religion hurts nobody."

"I would rather my children told lies," she replied, and while
Willoughby was reflecting that his sister-in-law was even more eccentric
than he remembered, pushed her chair back and swept upstairs. In a
second they heard her calling back, "Oh, look! We're out at sea!"

They followed her on to the deck. All the smoke and the houses had
disappeared, and the ship was out in a wide space of sea very fresh and
clear though pale in the early light. They had left London sitting on
its mud. A very thin line of shadow tapered on the horizon, scarcely
thick enough to stand the burden of Paris, which nevertheless rested
upon it. They were free of roads, free of mankind, and the same
exhilaration at their freedom ran through them all. The ship was making
her way steadily through small waves which slapped her and then fizzled
like effervescing water, leaving a little border of bubbles and foam on
either side. The colourless October sky above was thinly clouded as if
by the trail of wood-fire smoke, and the air was wonderfully salt and
brisk. Indeed it was too cold to stand still. Mrs. Ambrose drew her arm
within her husband's, and as they moved off it could be seen from the
way in which her sloping cheek turned up to his that she had something
private to communicate. They went a few paces and Rachel saw them kiss.

Down she looked into the depth of the sea. While it was slightly
disturbed on the surface by the passage of the _Euphrosyne_, beneath it
was green and dim, and it grew dimmer and dimmer until the sand at the
bottom was only a pale blur. One could scarcely see the black ribs of
wrecked ships, or the spiral towers made by the burrowings of great
eels, or the smooth green-sided monsters who came by flickering this way
and that.

--"And, Rachel, if any one wants me, I'm busy till one," said her
father, enforcing his words as he often did, when he spoke to his
daughter, by a smart blow upon the shoulder.

"Until one," he repeated. "And you'll find yourself some employment, eh?
Scales, French, a little German, eh? There's Mr. Pepper who knows more
about separable verbs than any man in Europe, eh?" and he went off
laughing. Rachel laughed, too, as indeed she had laughed ever since she
could remember, without thinking it funny, but because she admired her
father.

But just as she was turning with a view perhaps to finding some
employment, she was intercepted by a woman who was so broad and so thick
that to be intercepted by her was inevitable. The discreet tentative way
in which she moved, together with her sober black dress, showed that
she belonged to the lower orders; nevertheless she took up a rock-like
position, looking about her to see that no gentry were near before she
delivered her message, which had reference to the state of the sheets,
and was of the utmost gravity.

"How ever we're to get through this voyage, Miss Rachel, I really can't
tell," she began with a shake of her head. "There's only just sheets
enough to go round, and the master's has a rotten place you could
put your fingers through. And the counterpanes. Did you notice the
counterpanes? I thought to myself a poor person would have been ashamed
of them. The one I gave Mr. Pepper was hardly fit to cover a dog. . . .
No, Miss Rachel, they could _not_ be mended; they're only fit for dust
sheets. Why, if one sewed one's finger to the bone, one would have one's
work undone the next time they went to the laundry."

Her voice in its indignation wavered as if tears were near.

There was nothing for it but to descend and inspect a large pile of
linen heaped upon a table. Mrs. Chailey handled the sheets as if she
knew each by name, character, and constitution. Some had yellow stains,
others had places where the threads made long ladders; but to the
ordinary eye they looked much as sheets usually do look, very chill,
white, cold, and irreproachably clean.

Suddenly Mrs. Chailey, turning from the subject of sheets, dismissing
them entirely, clenched her fists on the top of them, and proclaimed,
"And you couldn't ask a living creature to sit where I sit!"

Mrs. Chailey was expected to sit in a cabin which was large enough,
but too near the boilers, so that after five minutes she could hear her
heart "go," she complained, putting her hand above it, which was a state
of things that Mrs. Vinrace, Rachel's mother, would never have dreamt
of inflicting--Mrs. Vinrace, who knew every sheet in her house, and
expected of every one the best they could do, but no more.

It was the easiest thing in the world to grant another room, and the
problem of sheets simultaneously and miraculously solved itself, the
spots and ladders not being past cure after all, but--

"Lies! Lies! Lies!" exclaimed the mistress indignantly, as she ran up on
to the deck. "What's the use of telling me lies?"

In her anger that a woman of fifty should behave like a child and come
cringing to a girl because she wanted to sit where she had not leave to
sit, she did not think of the particular case, and, unpacking her music,
soon forgot all about the old woman and her sheets.

Mrs. Chailey folded her sheets, but her expression testified to flatness
within. The world no longer cared about her, and a ship was not a home.
When the lamps were lit yesterday, and the sailors went tumbling above
her head, she had cried; she would cry this evening; she would cry
to-morrow. It was not home. Meanwhile she arranged her ornaments in the
room which she had won too easily. They were strange ornaments to
bring on a sea voyage--china pugs, tea-sets in miniature, cups stamped
floridly with the arms of the city of Bristol, hair-pin boxes crusted
with shamrock, antelopes' heads in coloured plaster, together with a
multitude of tiny photographs, representing downright workmen in their
Sunday best, and women holding white babies. But there was one portrait
in a gilt frame, for which a nail was needed, and before she sought it
Mrs. Chailey put on her spectacles and read what was written on a slip
of paper at the back:

"This picture of her mistress is given to Emma Chailey by Willoughby
Vinrace in gratitude for thirty years of devoted service."

Tears obliterated the words and the head of the nail.

"So long as I can do something for your family," she was saying, as she
hammered at it, when a voice called melodiously in the passage:

"Mrs. Chailey! Mrs. Chailey!"

Chailey instantly tidied her dress, composed her face, and opened the
door.

"I'm in a fix," said Mrs. Ambrose, who was flushed and out of breath.
"You know what gentlemen are. The chairs too high--the tables too
low--there's six inches between the floor and the door. What I want's
a hammer, an old quilt, and have you such a thing as a kitchen table?
Anyhow, between us"--she now flung open the door of her husband's
sitting room, and revealed Ridley pacing up and down, his forehead all
wrinkled, and the collar of his coat turned up.

"It's as though they'd taken pains to torment me!" he cried, stopping
dead. "Did I come on this voyage in order to catch rheumatism and
pneumonia? Really one might have credited Vinrace with more sense.
My dear," Helen was on her knees under a table, "you are only making
yourself untidy, and we had much better recognise the fact that we are
condemned to six weeks of unspeakable misery. To come at all was the
height of folly, but now that we are here I suppose that I can face
it like a man. My diseases of course will be increased--I feel already
worse than I did yesterday, but we've only ourselves to thank, and the
children happily--"

"Move! Move! Move!" cried Helen, chasing him from corner to corner with
a chair as though he were an errant hen. "Out of the way, Ridley, and in
half an hour you'll find it ready."

She turned him out of the room, and they could hear him groaning and
swearing as he went along the passage.

"I daresay he isn't very strong," said Mrs. Chailey, looking at Mrs.
Ambrose compassionately, as she helped to shift and carry.

"It's books," sighed Helen, lifting an armful of sad volumes from the
floor to the shelf. "Greek from morning to night. If ever Miss Rachel
marries, Chailey, pray that she may marry a man who doesn't know his
ABC."

The preliminary discomforts and harshnesses, which generally make the
first days of a sea voyage so cheerless and trying to the temper, being
somehow lived through, the succeeding days passed pleasantly enough.
October was well advanced, but steadily burning with a warmth that made
the early months of the summer appear very young and capricious. Great
tracts of the earth lay now beneath the autumn sun, and the whole of
England, from the bald moors to the Cornish rocks, was lit up from dawn
to sunset, and showed in stretches of yellow, green, and purple. Under
that illumination even the roofs of the great towns glittered. In
thousands of small gardens, millions of dark-red flowers were blooming,
until the old ladies who had tended them so carefully came down the
paths with their scissors, snipped through their juicy stalks, and laid
them upon cold stone ledges in the village church. Innumerable parties
of picnickers coming home at sunset cried, "Was there ever such a day
as this?" "It's you," the young men whispered; "Oh, it's you," the young
women replied. All old people and many sick people were drawn, were it
only for a foot or two, into the open air, and prognosticated pleasant
things about the course of the world. As for the confidences and
expressions of love that were heard not only in cornfields but in
lamplit rooms, where the windows opened on the garden, and men with
cigars kissed women with grey hairs, they were not to be counted. Some
said that the sky was an emblem of the life to come. Long-tailed birds
clattered and screamed, and crossed from wood to wood, with golden eyes
in their plumage.

But while all this went on by land, very few people thought about the
sea. They took it for granted that the sea was calm; and there was no
need, as there is in many houses when the creeper taps on the bedroom
windows, for the couples to murmur before they kiss, "Think of the ships
to-night," or "Thank Heaven, I'm not the man in the lighthouse!" For all
they imagined, the ships when they vanished on the sky-line dissolved,
like snow in water. The grown-up view, indeed, was not much clearer than
the view of the little creatures in bathing drawers who were trotting
in to the foam all along the coasts of England, and scooping up buckets
full of water. They saw white sails or tufts of smoke pass across the
horizon, and if you had said that these were waterspouts, or the petals
of white sea flowers, they would have agreed.

The people in ships, however, took an equally singular view of England.
Not only did it appear to them to be an island, and a very small island,
but it was a shrinking island in which people were imprisoned. One
figured them first swarming about like aimless ants, and almost pressing
each other over the edge; and then, as the ship withdrew, one figured
them making a vain clamour, which, being unheard, either ceased, or rose
into a brawl. Finally, when the ship was out of sight of land, it became
plain that the people of England were completely mute. The disease
attacked other parts of the earth; Europe shrank, Asia shrank, Africa
and America shrank, until it seemed doubtful whether the ship would ever
run against any of those wrinkled little rocks again. But, on the other
hand, an immense dignity had descended upon her; she was an inhabitant
of the great world, which has so few inhabitants, travelling all day
across an empty universe, with veils drawn before her and behind. She
was more lonely than the caravan crossing the desert; she was infinitely
more mysterious, moving by her own power and sustained by her own
resources. The sea might give her death or some unexampled joy, and none
would know of it. She was a bride going forth to her husband, a virgin
unknown of men; in her vigor and purity she might be likened to all
beautiful things, for as a ship she had a life of her own.

Indeed if they had not been blessed in their weather, one blue day being
bowled up after another, smooth, round, and flawless. Mrs. Ambrose would
have found it very dull. As it was, she had her embroidery frame set
up on deck, with a little table by her side on which lay open a black
volume of philosophy. She chose a thread from the vari-coloured tangle
that lay in her lap, and sewed red into the bark of a tree, or yellow
into the river torrent. She was working at a great design of a tropical
river running through a tropical forest, where spotted deer would
eventually browse upon masses of fruit, bananas, oranges, and giant
pomegranates, while a troop of naked natives whirled darts into the air.
Between the stitches she looked to one side and read a sentence about
the Reality of Matter, or the Nature of Good. Round her men in blue
jerseys knelt and scrubbed the boards, or leant over the rails and
whistled, and not far off Mr. Pepper sat cutting up roots with a
penknife. The rest were occupied in other parts of the ship: Ridley at
his Greek--he had never found quarters more to his liking; Willoughby at
his documents, for he used a voyage to work of arrears of business; and
Rachel--Helen, between her sentences of philosophy, wondered sometimes
what Rachel _did_ do with herself? She meant vaguely to go and see. They
had scarcely spoken two words to each other since that first evening;
they were polite when they met, but there had been no confidence of any
kind. Rachel seemed to get on very well with her father--much better,
Helen thought, than she ought to--and was as ready to let Helen alone as
Helen was to let her alone.

At that moment Rachel was sitting in her room doing absolutely nothing.
When the ship was full this apartment bore some magnificent title and
was the resort of elderly sea-sick ladies who left the deck to their
youngsters. By virtue of the piano, and a mess of books on the floor,
Rachel considered it her room, and there she would sit for hours playing
very difficult music, reading a little German, or a little English when
the mood took her, and doing--as at this moment--absolutely nothing.

The way she had been educated, joined to a fine natural indolence, was
of course partly the reason of it, for she had been educated as the
majority of well-to-do girls in the last part of the nineteenth century
were educated. Kindly doctors and gentle old professors had taught her
the rudiments of about ten different branches of knowledge, but they
would as soon have forced her to go through one piece of drudgery
thoroughly as they would have told her that her hands were dirty. The
one hour or the two hours weekly passed very pleasantly, partly owing
to the other pupils, partly to the fact that the window looked upon
the back of a shop, where figures appeared against the red windows in
winter, partly to the accidents that are bound to happen when more than
two people are in the same room together. But there was no subject in
the world which she knew accurately. Her mind was in the state of an
intelligent man's in the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth;
she would believe practically anything she was told, invent reasons for
anything she said. The shape of the earth, the history of the world,
how trains worked, or money was invested, what laws were in force, which
people wanted what, and why they wanted it, the most elementary idea of
a system in modern life--none of this had been imparted to her by any of
her professors or mistresses. But this system of education had one great
advantage. It did not teach anything, but it put no obstacle in the way
of any real talent that the pupil might chance to have. Rachel, being
musical, was allowed to learn nothing but music; she became a fanatic
about music. All the energies that might have gone into languages,
science, or literature, that might have made her friends, or shown her
the world, poured straight into music. Finding her teachers inadequate,
she had practically taught herself. At the age of twenty-four she knew
as much about music as most people do when they are thirty; and could
play as well as nature allowed her to, which, as became daily more
obvious, was a really generous allowance. If this one definite gift
was surrounded by dreams and ideas of the most extravagant and foolish
description, no one was any the wiser.

Her education being thus ordinary, her circumstances were no more out of
the common. She was an only child and had never been bullied and laughed
at by brothers and sisters. Her mother having died when she was eleven,
two aunts, the sisters of her father, brought her up, and they lived
for the sake of the air in a comfortable house in Richmond. She was
of course brought up with excessive care, which as a child was for her
health; as a girl and a young woman was for what it seems almost crude
to call her morals. Until quite lately she had been completely ignorant
that for women such things existed. She groped for knowledge in old
books, and found it in repulsive chunks, but she did not naturally care
for books and thus never troubled her head about the censorship which
was exercised first by her aunts, later by her father. Friends might
have told her things, but she had few of her own age,--Richmond being
an awkward place to reach,--and, as it happened, the only girl she knew
well was a religious zealot, who in the fervour of intimacy talked about
God, and the best ways of taking up one's cross, a topic only fitfully
interesting to one whose mind reached other stages at other times.

But lying in her chair, with one hand behind her head, the other
grasping the knob on the arm, she was clearly following her thoughts
intently. Her education left her abundant time for thinking. Her eyes
were fixed so steadily upon a ball on the rail of the ship that she
would have been startled and annoyed if anything had chanced to obscure
it for a second. She had begun her meditations with a shout of laughter,
caused by the following translation from _Tristan_:

     In shrinking trepidation
       His shame he seems to hide
     While to the king his relation
       He brings the corpse-like Bride.
     Seems it so senseless what I say?

She cried that it did, and threw down the book. Next she had picked up
_Cowper's_ _Letters_, the classic prescribed by her father which had
bored her, so that one sentence chancing to say something about the
smell of broom in his garden, she had thereupon seen the little hall at
Richmond laden with flowers on the day of her mother's funeral, smelling
so strong that now any flower-scent brought back the sickly horrible
sensation; and so from one scene she passed, half-hearing, half-seeing,
to another. She saw her Aunt Lucy arranging flowers in the drawing-room.

"Aunt Lucy," she volunteered, "I don't like the smell of broom; it
reminds me of funerals."

"Nonsense, Rachel," Aunt Lucy replied; "don't say such foolish things,
dear. I always think it a particularly cheerful plant."

Lying in the hot sun her mind was fixed upon the characters of her
aunts, their views, and the way they lived. Indeed this was a subject
that lasted her hundreds of morning walks round Richmond Park, and
blotted out the trees and the people and the deer. Why did they do the
things they did, and what did they feel, and what was it all about?
Again she heard Aunt Lucy talking to Aunt Eleanor. She had been that
morning to take up the character of a servant, "And, of course, at
half-past ten in the morning one expects to find the housemaid brushing
the stairs." How odd! How unspeakably odd! But she could not explain to
herself why suddenly as her aunt spoke the whole system in which they
lived had appeared before her eyes as something quite unfamiliar and
inexplicable, and themselves as chairs or umbrellas dropped about
here and there without any reason. She could only say with her slight
stammer, "Are you f-f-fond of Aunt Eleanor, Aunt Lucy?" to which her
aunt replied, with her nervous hen-like twitter of a laugh, "My dear
child, what questions you do ask!"

"How fond? Very fond!" Rachel pursued.

"I can't say I've ever thought 'how,'" said Miss Vinrace. "If one cares
one doesn't think 'how,' Rachel," which was aimed at the niece who had
never yet "come" to her aunts as cordially as they wished.

"But you know I care for you, don't you, dear, because you're your
mother's daughter, if for no other reason, and there _are_ plenty of
other reasons"--and she leant over and kissed her with some emotion, and
the argument was spilt irretrievably about the place like a bucket of
milk.

By these means Rachel reached that stage in thinking, if thinking it can
be called, when the eyes are intent upon a ball or a knob and the lips
cease to move. Her efforts to come to an understanding had only hurt
her aunt's feelings, and the conclusion must be that it is better not
to try. To feel anything strongly was to create an abyss between oneself
and others who feel strongly perhaps but differently. It was far better
to play the piano and forget all the rest. The conclusion was very
welcome. Let these odd men and women--her aunts, the Hunts, Ridley,
Helen, Mr. Pepper, and the rest--be symbols,--featureless but dignified,
symbols of age, of youth, of motherhood, of learning, and beautiful
often as people upon the stage are beautiful. It appeared that nobody
ever said a thing they meant, or ever talked of a feeling they felt, but
that was what music was for. Reality dwelling in what one saw and felt,
but did not talk about, one could accept a system in which things went
round and round quite satisfactorily to other people, without often
troubling to think about it, except as something superficially strange.
Absorbed by her music she accepted her lot very complacently, blazing
into indignation perhaps once a fortnight, and subsiding as she subsided
now. Inextricably mixed in dreamy confusion, her mind seemed to enter
into communion, to be delightfully expanded and combined with the spirit
of the whitish boards on deck, with the spirit of the sea, with the
spirit of Beethoven Op. 112, even with the spirit of poor William Cowper
there at Olney. Like a ball of thistledown it kissed the sea, rose,
kissed it again, and thus rising and kissing passed finally out of
sight. The rising and falling of the ball of thistledown was represented
by the sudden droop forward of her own head, and when it passed out of
sight she was asleep.

Ten minutes later Mrs. Ambrose opened the door and looked at her. It did
not surprise her to find that this was the way in which Rachel passed
her mornings. She glanced round the room at the piano, at the books,
at the general mess. In the first place she considered Rachel
aesthetically; lying unprotected she looked somehow like a victim
dropped from the claws of a bird of prey, but considered as a woman,
a young woman of twenty-four, the sight gave rise to reflections. Mrs.
Ambrose stood thinking for at least two minutes. She then smiled, turned
noiselessly away and went, lest the sleeper should waken, and there
should be the awkwardness of speech between them.