Chapter 1

In my opinion, it is impossible to create characters until one has spent
a long time in studying men, as it is impossible to speak a language
until it has been seriously acquired. Not being old enough to invent, I
content myself with narrating, and I beg the reader to assure himself of
the truth of a story in which all the characters, with the exception of
the heroine, are still alive. Eye-witnesses of the greater part of the
facts which I have collected are to be found in Paris, and I might call
upon them to confirm me if my testimony is not enough. And, thanks to a
particular circumstance, I alone can write these things, for I alone
am able to give the final details, without which it would have been
impossible to make the story at once interesting and complete.

This is how these details came to my knowledge. On the 12th of March,
1847, I saw in the Rue Lafitte a great yellow placard announcing a sale
of furniture and curiosities. The sale was to take place on account of
the death of the owner. The owner’s name was not mentioned, but the sale
was to be held at 9, Rue d’Antin, on the 16th, from 12 to 5. The placard
further announced that the rooms and furniture could be seen on the 13th
and 14th.

I have always been very fond of curiosities, and I made up my mind not
to miss the occasion, if not of buying some, at all events of seeing
them. Next day I called at 9, Rue d’Antin.

It was early in the day, and yet there were already a number of
visitors, both men and women, and the women, though they were dressed
in cashmere and velvet, and had their carriages waiting for them at the
door, gazed with astonishment and admiration at the luxury which they
saw before them.

I was not long in discovering the reason of this astonishment and
admiration, for, having begun to examine things a little carefully, I
discovered without difficulty that I was in the house of a kept woman.
Now, if there is one thing which women in society would like to see (and
there were society women there), it is the home of those women whose
carriages splash their own carriages day by day, who, like them, side by
side with them, have their boxes at the Opera and at the Italiens,
and who parade in Paris the opulent insolence of their beauty, their
diamonds, and their scandal.

This one was dead, so the most virtuous of women could enter even her
bedroom. Death had purified the air of this abode of splendid foulness,
and if more excuse were needed, they had the excuse that they had merely
come to a sale, they knew not whose. They had read the placards, they
wished to see what the placards had announced, and to make their choice
beforehand. What could be more natural? Yet, all the same, in the midst
of all these beautiful things, they could not help looking about for
some traces of this courtesan’s life, of which they had heard, no doubt,
strange enough stories.

Unfortunately the mystery had vanished with the goddess, and, for
all their endeavours, they discovered only what was on sale since
the owner’s decease, and nothing of what had been on sale during her
lifetime. For the rest, there were plenty of things worth buying. The
furniture was superb; there were rosewood and buhl cabinets and tables,
Sevres and Chinese vases, Saxe statuettes, satin, velvet, lace; there
was nothing lacking.

I sauntered through the rooms, following the inquisitive ladies of
distinction. They entered a room with Persian hangings, and I was just
going to enter in turn, when they came out again almost immediately,
smiling, and as if ashamed of their own curiosity. I was all the more
eager to see the room. It was the dressing-room, laid out with all the
articles of toilet, in which the dead woman’s extravagance seemed to be
seen at its height.

On a large table against the wall, a table three feet in width and six
in length, glittered all the treasures of Aucoc and Odiot. It was a
magnificent collection, and there was not one of those thousand little
things so necessary to the toilet of a woman of the kind which was not
in gold or silver. Such a collection could only have been got together
little by little, and the same lover had certainly not begun and ended
it.

Not being shocked at the sight of a kept woman’s dressing-room, I
amused myself with examining every detail, and I discovered that these
magnificently chiselled objects bore different initials and different
coronets. I looked at one after another, each recalling a separate
shame, and I said that God had been merciful to the poor child, in not
having left her to pay the ordinary penalty, but rather to die in
the midst of her beauty and luxury, before the coming of old age, the
courtesan’s first death.

Is there anything sadder in the world than the old age of vice,
especially in woman? She preserves no dignity, she inspires no interest.
The everlasting repentance, not of the evil ways followed, but of the
plans that have miscarried, the money that has been spent in vain, is
as saddening a thing as one can well meet with. I knew an aged woman who
had once been “gay,” whose only link with the past was a daughter almost
as beautiful as she herself had been. This poor creature to whom her
mother had never said, “You are my child,” except to bid her nourish her
old age as she herself had nourished her youth, was called Louise, and,
being obedient to her mother, she abandoned herself without volition,
without passion, without pleasure, as she would have worked at any other
profession that might have been taught her.

The constant sight of dissipation, precocious dissipation, in addition
to her constant sickly state, had extinguished in her mind all the
knowledge of good and evil that God had perhaps given her, but that no
one had ever thought of developing. I shall always remember her, as
she passed along the boulevards almost every day at the same hour,
accompanied by her mother as assiduously as a real mother might have
accompanied her daughter. I was very young then, and ready to accept for
myself the easy morality of the age. I remember, however, the
contempt and disgust which awoke in me at the sight of this scandalous
chaperoning. Her face, too, was inexpressibly virginal in its expression
of innocence and of melancholy suffering. She was like a figure of
Resignation.

One day the girl’s face was transfigured. In the midst of all the
debauches mapped out by her mother, it seemed to her as if God had left
over for her one happiness. And why indeed should God, who had made her
without strength, have left her without consolation, under the sorrowful
burden of her life? One day, then, she realized that she was to have a
child, and all that remained to her of chastity leaped for joy. The soul
has strange refuges. Louise ran to tell the good news to her mother.
It is a shameful thing to speak of, but we are not telling tales of
pleasant sins; we are telling of true facts, which it would be better,
no doubt, to pass over in silence, if we did not believe that it is
needful from time to time to reveal the martyrdom of those who are
condemned without bearing, scorned without judging; shameful it is, but
this mother answered the daughter that they had already scarce enough
for two, and would certainly not have enough for three; that such
children are useless, and a lying-in is so much time lost.

Next day a midwife, of whom all we will say is that she was a friend of
the mother, visited Louise, who remained in bed for a few days, and then
got up paler and feebler than before.

Three months afterward a man took pity on her and tried to heal her,
morally and physically; but the last shock had been too violent, and
Louise died of it. The mother still lives; how? God knows.

This story returned to my mind while I looked at the silver toilet
things, and a certain space of time must have elapsed during these
reflections, for no one was left in the room but myself and an
attendant, who, standing near the door, was carefully watching me to see
that I did not pocket anything.

I went up to the man, to whom I was causing so much anxiety. “Sir,” I
said, “can you tell me the name of the person who formerly lived here?”

“Mademoiselle Marguerite Gautier.”

I knew her by name and by sight.

“What!” I said to the attendant; “Marguerite Gautier is dead?”

“Yes, sir.”

“When did she die?”

“Three weeks ago, I believe.”

“And why are the rooms on view?”

“The creditors believe that it will send up the prices. People can see
beforehand the effect of the things; you see that induces them to buy.”

“She was in debt, then?”

“To any extent, sir.”

“But the sale will cover it?”

“And more too.”

“Who will get what remains over?”

“Her family.”

“She had a family?”

“It seems so.”

“Thanks.”

The attendant, reassured as to my intentions, touched his hat, and I
went out.

“Poor girl!” I said to myself as I returned home; “she must have had a
sad death, for, in her world, one has friends only when one is perfectly
well.” And in spite of myself I began to feel melancholy over the fate
of Marguerite Gautier.

It will seem absurd to many people, but I have an unbounded sympathy
for women of this kind, and I do not think it necessary to apologize for
such sympathy.

One day, as I was going to the Prefecture for a passport, I saw in one
of the neighbouring streets a poor girl who was being marched along by
two policemen. I do not know what was the matter. All I know is that she
was weeping bitterly as she kissed an infant only a few months old, from
whom her arrest was to separate her. Since that day I have never dared
to despise a woman at first sight.



Chapter 2

The sale was to take place on the 16th. A day’s interval had been left
between the visiting days and the sale, in order to give time for taking
down the hangings, curtains, etc. I had just returned from abroad. It
was natural that I had not heard of Marguerite’s death among the pieces
of news which one’s friends always tell on returning after an absence.
Marguerite was a pretty woman; but though the life of such women makes
sensation enough, their death makes very little. They are suns which set
as they rose, unobserved. Their death, when they die young, is heard
of by all their lovers at the same moment, for in Paris almost all
the lovers of a well-known woman are friends. A few recollections are
exchanged, and everybody’s life goes on as if the incident had never
occurred, without so much as a tear.

Nowadays, at twenty-five, tears have become so rare a thing that they
are not to be squandered indiscriminately. It is the most that can be
expected if the parents who pay for being wept over are wept over in
return for the price they pay.

As for me, though my initials did not occur on any of Marguerite’s
belongings, that instinctive indulgence, that natural pity that I have
already confessed, set me thinking over her death, more perhaps than it
was worth thinking over. I remembered having often met Marguerite in the
Bois, where she went regularly every day in a little blue coupe drawn by
two magnificent bays, and I had noticed in her a distinction quite apart
from other women of her kind, a distinction which was enhanced by a
really exceptional beauty.

These unfortunate creatures whenever they go out are always accompanied
by somebody or other. As no man cares to make himself conspicuous by
being seen in their company, and as they are afraid of solitude, they
take with them either those who are not well enough off to have a
carriage, or one or another of those elegant, ancient ladies, whose
elegance is a little inexplicable, and to whom one can always go for
information in regard to the women whom they accompany.

In Marguerite’s case it was quite different. She was always alone when
she drove in the Champs-Elysees, lying back in her carriage as much as
possible, dressed in furs in winter, and in summer wearing very simple
dresses; and though she often passed people whom she knew, her smile,
when she chose to smile, was seen only by them, and a duchess might
have smiled in just such a manner. She did not drive to and fro like the
others, from the Rond-Point to the end of the Champs-Elysees. She drove
straight to the Bois. There she left her carriage, walked for an hour,
returned to her carriage, and drove rapidly home.

All these circumstances which I had so often witnessed came back to my
memory, and I regretted her death as one might regret the destruction of
a beautiful work of art.

It was impossible to see more charm in beauty than in that of
Marguerite. Excessively tall and thin, she had in the fullest degree the
art of repairing this oversight of Nature by the mere arrangement of the
things she wore. Her cashmere reached to the ground, and showed on each
side the large flounces of a silk dress, and the heavy muff which she
held pressed against her bosom was surrounded by such cunningly arranged
folds that the eye, however exacting, could find no fault with the
contour of the lines. Her head, a marvel, was the object of the most
coquettish care. It was small, and her mother, as Musset would say,
seemed to have made it so in order to make it with care.

Set, in an oval of indescribable grace, two black eyes, surmounted by
eyebrows of so pure a curve that it seemed as if painted; veil these
eyes with lovely lashes, which, when drooped, cast their shadow on the
rosy hue of the cheeks; trace a delicate, straight nose, the nostrils
a little open, in an ardent aspiration toward the life of the senses;
design a regular mouth, with lips parted graciously over teeth as white
as milk; colour the skin with the down of a peach that no hand
has touched, and you will have the general aspect of that charming
countenance. The hair, black as jet, waving naturally or not, was
parted on the forehead in two large folds and draped back over the head,
leaving in sight just the tip of the ears, in which there glittered two
diamonds, worth four to five thousand francs each. How it was that her
ardent life had left on Marguerite’s face the virginal, almost childlike
expression, which characterized it, is a problem which we can but state,
without attempting to solve it.

Marguerite had a marvellous portrait of herself, by Vidal, the only man
whose pencil could do her justice. I had this portrait by me for a few
days after her death, and the likeness was so astonishing that it has
helped to refresh my memory in regard to some points which I might not
otherwise have remembered.

Some among the details of this chapter did not reach me until later,
but I write them here so as not to be obliged to return to them when the
story itself has begun.

Marguerite was always present at every first night, and passed every
evening either at the theatre or the ball. Whenever there was a new
piece she was certain to be seen, and she invariably had three things
with her on the ledge of her ground-floor box: her opera-glass, a bag of
sweets, and a bouquet of camellias.

For twenty-five days of the month the camellias were white, and for five
they were red; no one ever knew the reason of this change of colour,
which I mention though I can not explain it; it was noticed both by her
friends and by the habitue’s of the theatres to which she most often
went. She was never seen with any flowers but camellias. At the
florist’s, Madame Barjon’s, she had come to be called “the Lady of the
Camellias,” and the name stuck to her.

Like all those who move in a certain set in Paris, I knew that
Marguerite had lived with some of the most fashionable young men in
society, that she spoke of it openly, and that they themselves
boasted of it; so that all seemed equally pleased with one another.
Nevertheless, for about three years, after a visit to Bagnees, she was
said to be living with an old duke, a foreigner, enormously rich, who
had tried to remove her as far as possible from her former life, and, as
it seemed, entirely to her own satisfaction.

This is what I was told on the subject. In the spring of 1847 Marguerite
was so ill that the doctors ordered her to take the waters, and she went
to Bagneres. Among the invalids was the daughter of this duke; she
was not only suffering from the same complaint, but she was so like
Marguerite in appearance that they might have been taken for sisters;
the young duchess was in the last stage of consumption, and a few days
after Marguerite’s arrival she died. One morning, the duke, who had
remained at Bagneres to be near the soil that had buried a part of his
heart, caught sight of Marguerite at a turn of the road. He seemed to
see the shadow of his child, and going up to her, he took her hands,
embraced and wept over her, and without even asking her who she was,
begged her to let him love in her the living image of his dead child.
Marguerite, alone at Bagneres with her maid, and not being in any fear
of compromising herself, granted the duke’s request. Some people who
knew her, happening to be at Bagneres, took upon themselves to explain
Mademoiselle Gautier’s true position to the duke. It was a blow to
the old man, for the resemblance with his daughter was ended in one
direction, but it was too late. She had become a necessity to his heart,
his only pretext, his only excuse, for living. He made no reproaches,
he had indeed no right to do so, but he asked her if she felt herself
capable of changing her mode of life, offering her in return for the
sacrifice every compensation that she could desire. She consented.

It must be said that Marguerite was just then very ill. The past seemed
to her sensitive nature as if it were one of the main causes of her
illness, and a sort of superstition led her to hope that God would
restore to her both health and beauty in return for her repentance and
conversion. By the end of the summer, the waters, sleep, the natural
fatigue of long walks, had indeed more or less restored her health. The
duke accompanied her to Paris, where he continued to see her as he had
done at Bagneres.

This liaison, whose motive and origin were quite unknown, caused a great
sensation, for the duke, already known for his immense fortune,
now became known for his prodigality. All this was set down to the
debauchery of a rich old man, and everything was believed except the
truth. The father’s sentiment for Marguerite had, in truth, so pure a
cause that anything but a communion of hearts would have seemed to him a
kind of incest, and he had never spoken to her a word which his daughter
might not have heard.

Far be it from me to make out our heroine to be anything but what she
was. As long as she remained at Bagneres, the promise she had made to
the duke had not been hard to keep, and she had kept it; but, once back
in Paris, it seemed to her, accustomed to a life of dissipation, of
balls, of orgies, as if the solitude, only interrupted by the duke’s
stated visits, would kill her with boredom, and the hot breath of her
old life came back across her head and heart.

We must add that Marguerite had returned more beautiful than she had
ever been; she was but twenty, and her malady, sleeping but not subdued,
continued to give her those feverish desires which are almost always the
result of diseases of the chest.

It was a great grief to the duke when his friends, always on the lookout
for some scandal on the part of the woman with whom, it seemed to them,
he was compromising himself, came to tell him, indeed to prove to him,
that at times when she was sure of not seeing him she received other
visits, and that these visits were often prolonged till the following
day. On being questioned, Marguerite admitted everything to the duke,
and advised him, without arriere-pensee, to concern himself with her no
longer, for she felt incapable of carrying out what she had undertaken,
and she did not wish to go on accepting benefits from a man whom she was
deceiving. The duke did not return for a week; it was all he could do,
and on the eighth day he came to beg Marguerite to let him still visit
her, promising that he would take her as she was, so long as he might
see her, and swearing that he would never utter a reproach against her,
not though he were to die of it.

This, then, was the state of things three months after Marguerite’s
return; that is to say, in November or December, 1842.



Chapter 3

At one o’clock on the 16th I went to the Rue d’Antin. The voice of the
auctioneer could be heard from the outer door. The rooms were crowded
with people. There were all the celebrities of the most elegant
impropriety, furtively examined by certain great ladies who had again
seized the opportunity of the sale in order to be able to see, close at
hand, women whom they might never have another occasion of meeting, and
whom they envied perhaps in secret for their easy pleasures. The Duchess
of F. elbowed Mlle. A., one of the most melancholy examples of our
modern courtesan; the Marquis de T. hesitated over a piece of furniture
the price of which was being run high by Mme. D., the most elegant and
famous adulteress of our time; the Duke of Y., who in Madrid is supposed
to be ruining himself in Paris, and in Paris to be ruining himself in
Madrid, and who, as a matter of fact, never even reaches the limit of
his income, talked with Mme. M., one of our wittiest story-tellers, who
from time to time writes what she says and signs what she writes, while
at the same time he exchanged confidential glances with Mme. de N., a
fair ornament of the Champs-Elysees, almost always dressed in pink
or blue, and driving two big black horses which Tony had sold her for
10,000 francs, and for which she had paid, after her fashion; finally,
Mlle. R., who makes by her mere talent twice what the women of the world
make by their dot and three times as much as the others make by their
amours, had come, in spite of the cold, to make some purchases, and was
not the least looked at among the crowd.

We might cite the initials of many more of those who found themselves,
not without some mutual surprise, side by side in one room. But we fear
to weary the reader. We will only add that everyone was in the highest
spirits, and that many of those present had known the dead woman, and
seemed quite oblivious of the fact. There was a sound of loud laughter;
the auctioneers shouted at the top of their voices; the dealers who had
filled the benches in front of the auction table tried in vain to obtain
silence, in order to transact their business in peace. Never was there a
noisier or a more varied gathering.

I slipped quietly into the midst of this tumult, sad to think of when
one remembered that the poor creature whose goods were being sold to pay
her debts had died in the next room. Having come rather to examine than
to buy, I watched the faces of the auctioneers, noticing how they
beamed with delight whenever anything reached a price beyond their
expectations. Honest creatures, who had speculated upon this woman’s
prostitution, who had gained their hundred per cent out of her, who had
plagued with their writs the last moments of her life, and who came now
after her death to gather in at once the fruits of their dishonourable
calculations and the interest on their shameful credit, How wise were
the ancients in having only one God for traders and robbers!

Dresses, cashmeres, jewels, were sold with incredible rapidity. There
was nothing that I cared for, and I still waited. All at once I heard:
“A volume, beautifully bound, gilt-edged, entitled Manon Lescaut. There
is something written on the first page. Ten francs.”

“Twelve,” said a voice after a longish silence.

“Fifteen,” I said.

Why? I did not know. Doubtless for the something written.

“Fifteen,” repeated the auctioneer.

“Thirty,” said the first bidder in a tone which seemed to defy further
competition.

It had now become a struggle. “Thirty-five,” I cried in the same tone.

“Forty.”

“Fifty.”

“Sixty.”

“A hundred.”

If I had wished to make a sensation I should certainly have succeeded,
for a profound silence had ensued, and people gazed at me as if to see
what sort of a person it was, who seemed to be so determined to possess
the volume.

The accent which I had given to my last word seemed to convince my
adversary; he preferred to abandon a conflict which could only have
resulted in making me pay ten times its price for the volume, and,
bowing, he said very gracefully, though indeed a little late:

“I give way, sir.”

Nothing more being offered, the book was assigned to me.

As I was afraid of some new fit of obstinacy, which my amour propre
might have sustained somewhat better than my purse, I wrote down my
name, had the book put on one side, and went out. I must have given
considerable food for reflection to the witnesses of this scene, who
would no doubt ask themselves what my purpose could have been in paying
a hundred francs for a book which I could have had anywhere for ten, or,
at the outside, fifteen.

An hour after, I sent for my purchase. On the first page was written
in ink, in an elegant hand, an inscription on the part of the giver. It
consisted of these words:

Manon to Marguerite.

Humility.

It was signed Armand Duval.

What was the meaning of the word Humility? Was Manon to recognise in
Marguerite, in the opinion of M. Armand Duval, her superior in vice or
in affection? The second interpretation seemed the more probable, for
the first would have been an impertinent piece of plain speaking which
Marguerite, whatever her opinion of herself, would never have accepted.

I went out again, and thought no more of the book until at night, when I
was going to bed.

Manon Lescaut is a touching story. I know every detail of it, and yet
whenever I come across the volume the same sympathy always draws me to
it; I open it, and for the hundredth time I live over again with the
heroine of the Abbe Prevost. Now this heroine is so true to life that I
feel as if I had known her; and thus the sort of comparison between
her and Marguerite gave me an unusual inclination to read it, and my
indulgence passed into pity, almost into a kind of love for the poor
girl to whom I owed the volume. Manon died in the desert, it is true,
but in the arms of the man who loved her with the whole energy of his
soul; who, when she was dead, dug a grave for her, and watered it with
his tears, and buried his heart in it; while Marguerite, a sinner like
Manon, and perhaps converted like her, had died in a sumptuous bed (it
seemed, after what I had seen, the bed of her past), but in that desert
of the heart, a more barren, a vaster, a more pitiless desert than that
in which Manon had found her last resting-place.

Marguerite, in fact, as I had found from some friends who knew of the
last circumstances of her life, had not a single real friend by her
bedside during the two months of her long and painful agony.

Then from Manon and Marguerite my mind wandered to those whom I knew,
and whom I saw singing along the way which led to just such another
death. Poor souls! if it is not right to love them, is it not well to
pity them? You pity the blind man who has never seen the daylight, the
deaf who has never heard the harmonies of nature, the dumb who has never
found a voice for his soul, and, under a false cloak of shame, you will
not pity this blindness of heart, this deafness of soul, this dumbness
of conscience, which sets the poor afflicted creature beside herself
and makes her, in spite of herself, incapable of seeing what is good, of
bearing the Lord, and of speaking the pure language of love and faith.

Hugo has written Marion Delorme, Musset has written Bernerette,
Alexandre Dumas has written Fernande, the thinkers and poets of all time
have brought to the courtesan the offering of their pity, and at times
a great man has rehabilitated them with his love and even with his name.
If I insist on this point, it is because many among those who have begun
to read me will be ready to throw down a book in which they will fear to
find an apology for vice and prostitution; and the author’s age will do
something, no doubt, to increase this fear. Let me undeceive those
who think thus, and let them go on reading, if nothing but such a fear
hinders them.

I am quite simply convinced of a certain principle, which is: For the
woman whose education has not taught her what is right, God almost
always opens two ways which lead thither the ways of sorrow and of love.
They are hard; those who walk in them walk with bleeding feet and torn
hands, but they also leave the trappings of vice upon the thorns of
the wayside, and reach the journey’s end in a nakedness which is not
shameful in the sight of the Lord.

Those who meet these bold travellers ought to succour them, and to tell
all that they have met them, for in so doing they point out the way. It
is not a question of setting at the outset of life two sign-posts, one
bearing the inscription “The Right Way,” the other the inscription “The
Wrong Way,” and of saying to those who come there, “Choose.” One must
needs, like Christ, point out the ways which lead from the second
road to the first, to those who have been easily led astray; and it is
needful that the beginning of these ways should not be too painful nor
appear too impenetrable.

Here is Christianity with its marvellous parable of the Prodigal Son to
teach us indulgence and pardon. Jesus was full of love for souls wounded
by the passions of men; he loved to bind up their wounds and to find in
those very wounds the balm which should heal them. Thus he said to the
Magdalen: “Much shall be forgiven thee because thou hast loved much,” a
sublimity of pardon which can only have called forth a sublime faith.

Why do we make ourselves more strict than Christ? Why, holding
obstinately to the opinions of the world, which hardens itself in
order that it may be thought strong, do we reject, as it rejects, souls
bleeding at wounds by which, like a sick man’s bad blood, the evil of
their past may be healed, if only a friendly hand is stretched out to
lave them and set them in the convalescence of the heart?

It is to my own generation that I speak, to those for whom the theories
of M. de Voltaire happily exist no longer, to those who, like myself,
realize that humanity, for these last fifteen years, has been in one of
its most audacious moments of expansion. The science of good and evil
is acquired forever; faith is refashioned, respect for sacred things has
returned to us, and if the world has not all at once become good, it has
at least become better. The efforts of every intelligent man tend in
the same direction, and every strong will is harnessed to the same
principle: Be good, be young, be true! Evil is nothing but vanity, let
us have the pride of good, and above all let us never despair. Do not
let us despise the woman who is neither mother, sister, maid, nor wife.
Do not let us limit esteem to the family nor indulgence to egoism. Since
“there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth than over
ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance,” let us give joy
to heaven. Heaven will render it back to us with usury. Let us leave on
our way the alms of pardon for those whom earthly desires have driven
astray, whom a divine hope shall perhaps save, and, as old women say
when they offer you some homely remedy of their own, if it does no good
it will do no harm.

Doubtless it must seem a bold thing to attempt to deduce these grand
results out of the meagre subject that I deal with; but I am one of
those who believe that all is in little. The child is small, and he
includes the man; the brain is narrow, and it harbours thought; the eye
is but a point, and it covers leagues.



Chapter 4

Two days after, the sale was ended. It had produced 3.50,000 francs. The
creditors divided among them two thirds, and the family, a sister and a
grand-nephew, received the remainder.

The sister opened her eyes very wide when the lawyer wrote to her that
she had inherited 50,000 francs. The girl had not seen her sister for
six or seven years, and did not know what had become of her from the
moment when she had disappeared from home. She came up to Paris in
haste, and great was the astonishment of those who had known Marguerite
when they saw as her only heir a fine, fat country girl, who until then
had never left her village. She had made the fortune at a single stroke,
without even knowing the source of that fortune. She went back, I heard
afterward, to her countryside, greatly saddened by her sister’s death,
but with a sadness which was somewhat lightened by the investment at
four and a half per cent which she had been able to make.

All these circumstances, often repeated in Paris, the mother city of
scandal, had begun to be forgotten, and I was even little by little
forgetting the part I had taken in them, when a new incident brought to
my knowledge the whole of Marguerite’s life, and acquainted me with
such pathetic details that I was taken with the idea of writing down the
story which I now write.

The rooms, now emptied of all their furniture, had been to let for three
or four days when one morning there was a ring at my door.

My servant, or, rather, my porter, who acted as my servant, went to the
door and brought me a card, saying that the person who had given it to
him wished to see me.

I glanced at the card and there read these two words: Armand Duval.

I tried to think where I had seen the name, and remembered the first
leaf of the copy of Manon Lescaut. What could the person who had given
the book to Marguerite want of me? I gave orders to ask him in at once.

I saw a young man, blond, tall, pale, dressed in a travelling suit which
looked as if he had not changed it for some days, and had not even taken
the trouble to brush it on arriving at Paris, for it was covered with
dust.

M. Duval was deeply agitated; he made no attempt to conceal his
agitation, and it was with tears in his eyes and a trembling voice that
he said to me:

“Sir, I beg you to excuse my visit and my costume; but young people are
not very ceremonious with one another, and I was so anxious to see you
to-day that I have not even gone to the hotel to which I have sent my
luggage, and have rushed straight here, fearing that, after all, I might
miss you, early as it is.”

I begged M. Duval to sit down by the fire; he did so, and, taking his
handkerchief from his pocket, hid his face in it for a moment.

“You must be at a loss to understand,” he went on, sighing sadly, “for
what purpose an unknown visitor, at such an hour, in such a costume, and
in tears, can have come to see you. I have simply come to ask of you a
great service.”

“Speak on, sir, I am entirely at your disposal.”

“You were present at the sale of Marguerite Gautier?”

At this word the emotion, which he had got the better of for an instant,
was too much for him, and he was obliged to cover his eyes with his
hand.

“I must seem to you very absurd,” he added, “but pardon me, and believe
that I shall never forget the patience with which you have listened to
me.”

“Sir,” I answered, “if the service which I can render you is able to
lessen your trouble a little, tell me at once what I can do for you, and
you will find me only too happy to oblige you.”

M. Duval’s sorrow was sympathetic, and in spite of myself I felt the
desire of doing him a kindness. Thereupon he said to me:

“You bought something at Marguerite’s sale?”

“Yes, a book.”

“Manon Lescaut?”

“Precisely.”

“Have you the book still?”

“It is in my bedroom.”

On hearing this, Armand Duval seemed to be relieved of a great weight,
and thanked me as if I had already rendered him a service merely by
keeping the book.

I got up and went into my room to fetch the book, which I handed to him.

“That is it indeed,” he said, looking at the inscription on the first
page and turning over the leaves; “that is it in deed,” and two big
tears fell on the pages. “Well, sir,” said he, lifting his head, and no
longer trying to hide from me that he had wept and was even then on the
point of weeping, “do you value this book very greatly?”

“Why?”

“Because I have come to ask you to give it up to me.”

“Pardon my curiosity, but was it you, then, who gave it to Marguerite
Gautier?”

“It was!”

“The book is yours, sir; take it back. I am happy to be able to hand it
over to you.”

“But,” said M. Duval with some embarrassment, “the least I can do is to
give you in return the price which you paid for it.”

“Allow me to offer it to you. The price of a single volume in a sale of
that kind is a mere nothing, and I do not remember how much I gave for
it.”

“You gave one hundred francs.”

“True,” I said, embarrassed in my turn, “how do you know?”

“It is quite simple. I hoped to reach Paris in time for the sale, and I
only managed to get here this morning. I was absolutely resolved to have
something which had belonged to her, and I hastened to the auctioneer
and asked him to allow me to see the list of the things sold and of
the buyers’ names. I saw that this volume had been bought by you, and
I decided to ask you to give it up to me, though the price you had
set upon it made me fear that you might yourself have some souvenir in
connection with the possession of the book.”

As he spoke, it was evident that he was afraid I had known Marguerite as
he had known her. I hastened to reassure him.

“I knew Mlle. Gautier only by sight,” I said; “her death made on me the
impression that the death of a pretty woman must always make on a young
man who had liked seeing her. I wished to buy something at her sale, and
I bid higher and higher for this book out of mere obstinacy and to annoy
someone else, who was equally keen to obtain it, and who seemed to defy
me to the contest. I repeat, then, that the book is yours, and once more
I beg you to accept it; do not treat me as if I were an auctioneer,
and let it be the pledge between us of a longer and more intimate
acquaintance.”

“Good,” said Armand, holding out his hand and pressing mine; “I accept,
and I shall be grateful to you all my life.”

I was very anxious to question Armand on the subject of Marguerite, for
the inscription in the book, the young man’s hurried journey, his desire
to possess the volume, piqued my curiosity; but I feared if I questioned
my visitor that I might seem to have refused his money only in order to
have the right to pry into his affairs.

It was as if he guessed my desire, for he said to me:

“Have you read the volume?”

“All through.”

“What did you think of the two lines that I wrote in it?”

“I realized at once that the woman to whom you had given the volume
must have been quite outside the ordinary category, for I could not take
those two lines as a mere empty compliment.”

“You were right. That woman was an angel. See, read this letter.” And he
handed to me a paper which seemed to have been many times reread.

I opened it, and this is what it contained:

“MY DEAR ARMAND:--I have received your letter. You are still good, and
I thank God for it. Yes, my friend, I am ill, and with one of those
diseases that never relent; but the interest you still take in me makes
my suffering less. I shall not live long enough, I expect, to have the
happiness of pressing the hand which has written the kind letter I have
just received; the words of it would be enough to cure me, if anything
could cure me. I shall not see you, for I am quite near death, and you
are hundreds of leagues away. My poor friend! your Marguerite of old
times is sadly changed. It is better perhaps for you not to see her
again than to see her as she is. You ask if I forgive you; oh, with all
my heart, friend, for the way you hurt me was only a way of proving the
love you had for me. I have been in bed for a month, and I think so much
of your esteem that I write every day the journal of my life, from the
moment we left each other to the moment when I shall be able to write
no longer. If the interest you take in me is real, Armand, when you come
back go and see Julie Duprat. She will give you my journal. You will
find in it the reason and the excuse for what has passed between us.
Julie is very good to me; we often talk of you together. She was there
when your letter came, and we both cried over it.

“If you had not sent me any word, I had told her to give you those
papers when you returned to France. Do not thank me for it. This daily
looking back on the only happy moments of my life does me an immense
amount of good, and if you will find in reading it some excuse for the
past. I, for my part, find a continual solace in it. I should like to
leave you something which would always remind you of me, but everything
here has been seized, and I have nothing of my own.

“Do you understand, my friend? I am dying, and from my bed I can hear
a man walking to and fro in the drawing-room; my creditors have put him
there to see that nothing is taken away, and that nothing remains to
me in case I do not die. I hope they will wait till the end before they
begin to sell.

“Oh, men have no pity! or rather, I am wrong, it is God who is just and
inflexible!

“And now, dear love, you will come to my sale, and you will buy
something, for if I put aside the least thing for you, they might accuse
you of embezzling seized goods.

“It is a sad life that I am leaving!

“It would be good of God to let me see you again before I die. According
to all probability, good-bye, my friend. Pardon me if I do not write a
longer letter, but those who say they are going to cure me wear me out
with bloodletting, and my hand refuses to write any more.

“MARGUERITE GAUTIER.”


The last two words were scarcely legible. I returned the letter to
Armand, who had, no doubt, read it over again in his mind while I was
reading it on paper, for he said to me as he took it:

“Who would think that a kept woman could have written that?” And,
overcome by recollections, he gazed for some time at the writing of the
letter, which he finally carried to his lips.

“And when I think,” he went on, “that she died before I could see her,
and that I shall never see her again, when I think that she did for me
what no sister would ever have done, I can not forgive myself for having
left her to die like that. Dead! Dead and thinking of me, writing and
repeating my name, poor dear Marguerite!”

And Armand, giving free outlet to his thoughts and his tears, held out
his hand to me, and continued:

“People would think it childish enough if they saw me lament like this
over a dead woman such as she; no one will ever know what I made that
woman suffer, how cruel I have been to her! how good, how resigned
she was! I thought it was I who had to forgive her, and to-day I feel
unworthy of the forgiveness which she grants me. Oh, I would give ten
years of my life to weep at her feet for an hour!”

It is always difficult to console a sorrow that is unknown to one, and
nevertheless I felt so lively a sympathy for the young man, he made me
so frankly the confidant of his distress, that I believed a word from me
would not be indifferent to him, and I said:

“Have you no parents, no friends? Hope. Go and see them; they will
console you. As for me, I can only pity you.”

“It is true,” he said, rising and walking to and fro in the room, “I
am wearying you. Pardon me, I did not reflect how little my sorrow must
mean to you, and that I am intruding upon you something which can not
and ought not to interest you at all.”

“You mistake my meaning. I am entirely at your service; only I regret
my inability to calm your distress. If my society and that of my friends
can give you any distraction, if, in short, you have need of me, no
matter in what way, I hope you will realize how much pleasure it will
give me to do anything for you.”

“Pardon, pardon,” said he; “sorrow sharpens the sensations. Let me stay
here for a few minutes longer, long enough to dry my eyes, so that the
idlers in the street may not look upon it as a curiosity to see a big
fellow like me crying. You have made me very happy by giving me this
book. I do not know how I can ever express my gratitude to you.”

“By giving me a little of your friendship,” said I, “and by telling me
the cause of your suffering. One feels better while telling what one
suffers.”

“You are right. But to-day I have too much need of tears; I can not very
well talk. One day I will tell you the whole story, and you will see if
I have reason for regretting the poor girl. And now,” he added, rubbing
his eyes for the last time, and looking at himself in the glass, “say
that you do not think me too absolutely idiotic, and allow me to come
back and see you another time.”

He cast on me a gentle and amiable look. I was near embracing him.
As for him, his eyes again began to fill with tears; he saw that I
perceived it and turned away his head.

“Come,” I said, “courage.”

“Good-bye,” he said.

And, making a desperate effort to restrain his tears, he rushed rather
than went out of the room.

I lifted the curtain of my window, and saw him get into the cabriolet
which awaited him at the door; but scarcely was he seated before he
burst into tears and hid his face in his pocket-handkerchief.



Chapter 5

A good while elapsed before I heard anything more of Armand, but, on the
other hand, I was constantly hearing of Marguerite.

I do not know if you have noticed, if once the name of anybody who might
in the natural course of things have always remained unknown, or at all
events indifferent to you, should be mentioned before you, immediately
details begin to group themselves about the name, and you find all your
friends talking to you about something which they have never mentioned
to you before. You discover that this person was almost touching you and
has passed close to you many times in your life without your noticing
it; you find coincidences in the events which are told you, a real
affinity with certain events of your own existence. I was not absolutely
at that point in regard to Marguerite, for I had seen and met her, I
knew her by sight and by reputation; nevertheless, since the moment
of the sale, her name came to my ears so frequently, and, owing to the
circumstance that I have mentioned in the last chapter, that name was
associated with so profound a sorrow, that my curiosity increased in
proportion with my astonishment. The consequence was that whenever I met
friends to whom I had never breathed the name of Marguerite, I always
began by saying:

“Did you ever know a certain Marguerite Gautier?”

“The Lady of the Camellias?”

“Exactly.”

“Oh, very well!”

The word was sometimes accompanied by a smile which could leave no doubt
as to its meaning.

“Well, what sort of a girl was she?”

“A good sort of girl.”

“Is that all?”

“Oh, yes; more intelligence and perhaps a little more heart than most.”

“Do you know anything particular about her?”

“She ruined Baron de G.”

“No more than that?”

“She was the mistress of the old Duke of...”

“Was she really his mistress?”

“So they say; at all events, he gave her a great deal of money.”

The general outlines were always the same. Nevertheless I was anxious
to find out something about the relations between Marguerite and Armand.
Meeting one day a man who was constantly about with known women, I asked
him: “Did you know Marguerite Gautier?”

The answer was the usual: “Very well.”

“What sort of a girl was she?”

“A fine, good girl. I was very sorry to hear of her death.”

“Had she not a lover called Armand Duval?”

“Tall and blond?”

“Yes.

“It is quite true.”

“Who was this Armand?”

“A fellow who squandered on her the little money he had, and then had to
leave her. They say he was quite wild about it.”

“And she?”

“They always say she was very much in love with him, but as girls like
that are in love. It is no good to ask them for what they can not give.”

“What has become of Armand?”

“I don’t know. We knew him very little. He was with Marguerite for five
or six months in the country. When she came back, he had gone.”

“And you have never seen him since?”

“Never.”

I, too, had not seen Armand again. I was beginning to ask myself if,
when he had come to see me, the recent news of Marguerite’s death had
not exaggerated his former love, and consequently his sorrow, and I
said to myself that perhaps he had already forgotten the dead woman, and
along with her his promise to come and see me again. This supposition
would have seemed probable enough in most instances, but in Armand’s
despair there had been an accent of real sincerity, and, going from one
extreme to another, I imagined that distress had brought on an illness,
and that my not seeing him was explained by the fact that he was ill,
perhaps dead.

I was interested in the young man in spite of myself. Perhaps there was
some selfishness in this interest; perhaps I guessed at some pathetic
love story under all this sorrow; perhaps my desire to know all about it
had much to do with the anxiety which Armand’s silence caused me.
Since M. Duval did not return to see me, I decided to go and see him. A
pretext was not difficult to find; unluckily I did not know his address,
and no one among those whom I questioned could give it to me.

I went to the Rue d’Antin; perhaps Marguerite’s porter would know where
Armand lived. There was a new porter; he knew as little about it as I.
I then asked in what cemetery Mlle. Gautier had been buried. It was
the Montmartre Cemetery. It was now the month of April; the weather was
fine, the graves were not likely to look as sad and desolate as they do
in winter; in short, it was warm enough for the living to think a little
of the dead, and pay them a visit. I went to the cemetery, saying to
myself: “One glance at Marguerite’s grave, and I shall know if Armand’s
sorrow still exists, and perhaps I may find out what has become of him.”

I entered the keeper’s lodge, and asked him if on the 22nd of February
a woman named Marguerite Gautier had not been buried in the Montmartre
Cemetery. He turned over the pages of a big book in which those who
enter this last resting-place are inscribed and numbered, and replied
that on the 22nd of February, at 12 o’clock, a woman of that name had
been buried.

I asked him to show me the grave, for there is no finding one’s way
without a guide in this city of the dead, which has its streets like a
city of the living. The keeper called over a gardener, to whom he gave
the necessary instructions; the gardener interrupted him, saying:
“I know, I know.--It is not difficult to find that grave,” he added,
turning to me.

“Why?”

“Because it has very different flowers from the others.”

“Is it you who look after it?”

“Yes, sir; and I wish all relations took as much trouble about the dead
as the young man who gave me my orders.”

After several turnings, the gardener stopped and said to me: “Here we
are.”

I saw before me a square of flowers which one would never have taken for
a grave, if it had not been for a white marble slab bearing a name.

The marble slab stood upright, an iron railing marked the limits of the
ground purchased, and the earth was covered with white camellias. “What
do you say to that?” said the gardener.

“It is beautiful.”

“And whenever a camellia fades, I have orders to replace it.”

“Who gave you the order?”

“A young gentleman, who cried the first time he came here; an old pal
of hers, I suppose, for they say she was a gay one. Very pretty, too, I
believe. Did you know her, sir?” “Yes.”

“Like the other?” said the gardener, with a knowing smile. “No, I never
spoke to her.”

“And you come here, too! It is very good of you, for those that come to
see the poor girl don’t exactly cumber the cemetery.”

“Doesn’t anybody come?”

“Nobody, except that young gentleman who came once.”

“Only once?”

“Yes, sir.”

“He never came back again?”

“No, but he will when he gets home.”

“He is away somewhere?”

“Yes.”

“Do you know where he is?”

“I believe he has gone to see Mlle. Gautier’s sister.”

“What does he want there?”

“He has gone to get her authority to have the corpse dug up again and
put somewhere else.”

“Why won’t he let it remain here?”

“You know, sir, people have queer notions about dead folk. We see
something of that every day. The ground here was only bought for five
years, and this young gentleman wants a perpetual lease and a bigger
plot of ground; it will be better in the new part.”

“What do you call the new part?”