ACT I


SCENE I


_The palace of the_ KING OF BURMAH.  _The scene is laid in the Hall of a
Hundred Doors_.  _In the distance can be seen the moat_, _the waiting
elephants_, _and the peacocks promenading proudly in the blinding
sunshine of late afternoon_.  _The scene discovers_ KING MENG BENG
_seated on a raised cushion sewn with rubies_, _under a canopy supported
by four attendants_, _motionless as bronze figures_.  _By his side is a
betel-nut box_, _glittering with gems_.  _On either side of him_, _but
much lower down_, _are the_ TWO AMBASSADORS OF THE KING OF CEYLON,
_bearers of the King of Ceylon's consent to the marriage of his only
daughter to Meng Beng in two years' time_, _men of grave_, _majestic
mien_, _clad in flowing robes almost monastic in their white simplicity_.
_They smoke gravely at the invitation of_ MENG BENG.

_Round about are grouped the courtiers_, _the poonygees_, _and the
kneeling servants_, _while in the background wait the dancing girls_.
_Banners_, _propelled with a measured rhythm_, _create an agreeable
breeze_.  _On a great table of gold stand goblets of gold and heaped-up
fruits_.  _Everywhere will be observed the emblems of the Royal Peacock
and the Sacred White Elephant_.  _Burmese musical instruments sound an
abrupt but charming discord_.  _The poinsettias flower punctuates points
of deepest colour from out of vases fashioned like the lotus_.  _Orchids
are everywhere_.  _The indescribable scent of Burmah steals across the
footlights_.  _The glow_, _the colour_, _the sun-swept vista sweeps
across the senses_.  THE KING _claps his hands_.  _The_ DANCING GIRLS,
_at the signal_, _advance_.  _They are clad in dresses made of fish
scales_, _which are fastened with diamonds and pale emeralds_, _to
imitate the upthrown spray on the crest of a wave_.  _The dance
concluded_, _the_ CINGALESE AMBASSADORS _rise and prepare to take
ceremonious leave of_ THE KING, _who hands to them_, _through his_
VIZIER, _his message to His Majesty of Ceylon_, _inscribed on palm leaves
and enclosed in a bejewelled casket_.

_Many flowery speeches pass_.  _Exit_ (_L._), _walking backwards_.

THE KING _expresses a desire for rest before starting by the Moon of
Taboung _{4} _for the Pagoda of Golden Flowers_.

_Exit_ MENG BENG (_C._), _an alcove of satin hangings which commands a
view of the great hall_.

_The Crowd break up into groups_.  U. RAI GYAN THOO _and_ MOUNG PHO MHIN
_converse on the tendency of the King to interference in affairs of
State_; _his extreme youth and delicacy of temperament_; _the pity that
the marriage is to be so long delayed_; _the necessity to find him some
distraction in the meantime_.

_Suddenly the tom-toms sound loudly_.  _There is much movement_.  _The
moon rises over the sea_.  _Torches flare as the attendants move to and
fro in the gardens beyond_.

_The White Elephant of the King_, _with its trappings of gold_, _is led
to the entrance where_, _at a word_, _it sinks obediently to the ground_.

THE KING _appears_.  _He has changed his gay apple-green dress to one of
more sombre hue_.  _He enters the howdah_--_the elephant rises_--_the
procession starts_.  _It consists of not fewer than two hundred persons_,
_keeping in view of the audience until lost by a bend in the avenue_.



SCENE II


THE PAGODA OF GOLDEN FLOWERS

Midnight

_Surrounded by Peepul-trees_, _the great Htee_, {6} _with its crown of a
myriad jewels_, _rises towards the violet_, _star-studded sky_, _its
golden bells tinkling in a soft night-wind_.

_When the curtain rises_, _the circular platform is deserted_.  _Statues
of Buddha seated and recumbent fill the numberless niches in the wall_,
_and before each burn long candles_; _heaped-up pink roses and japonica
on brass trays are lit from above by swinging coloured lamps_.  _At
intervals are stalls laden with fruit and cheroots_.  _All is
mysterious_, _solemn_, _beautiful_.

_A deep Burmese gong tolls_.  _People emerge from the four staircases
that lead up to the platform_.  _Men_, _women_, _and children_, _all in
gala attire_.  _The young people conversing_, _gesticulating_, _smiling_.
_The older people_, _more subdued_, _carry beads and votive offering to
Buddha_.  _Charming Burmese girls_, _with huge cigars_, _meet and greet
handsome Burmese men smoking cheroots and wearing flowers in their ears_.
_Children play silently with coloured balls_.  _In the corners_, _under
canopies_, _are seated fortune-tellers_, _busy casting horoscopes_.  _It
is a veritable riot of colour_, _with never a discordant note_.

_Through the crowd_ THE KING _passes alone and unrecognised_, _and
disappears through double doors of heavily carved teak wood_.  _He has
hardly passed when_ MAH PHRU, _a very lovely girl_, _enters in distress_.
_She whispers that she desires an audience of the King who has come
amongst them_.  _The few who hear her shrug their shoulders_, _smile_,
_and pass on_.  _They are incredulous_.  _She goes from group to group_,
_but the people turn from her with disdain_.  _Then the great doors
open_, _and_ THE KING _is seen_.  _The girl throws herself_, _Oriental
fashion_, _in his path_.  _Her beauty and her pathos arrest his attention
and he waves aside those who would interfere_.  _She implores_ THE KING'S
_protection_.  _She is willing to be his slave_.  _He listens with deep
attention_.  _She explains that since her father's death she has been
continuously persecuted by the village people on the double count of her
Italian blood and her poverty_.

_The girl invites him to come to her hut in the forest and verify what
she says_.  _With a gesture he signifies that he will follow where she
leads_.  _She rises_.  _The crowd gathers round_--_all are hushed to
silence_.  THE KING, _as one entranced_, _puts aside all who would in any
way interfere_.  _The girl precedes him_, _going from the Pagoda towards
the night_.  _When she reaches the great staircase_, _she beckons_,
_Oriental fashion_, _with downward hand_.  _The scene should_, _in
grouping and colour_, _make for rare beauty_.



SCENE III


_A humble dhunni-thatched hut_, _set amidst the whispering grandeur of
the jungle_, _with its mighty trees_, _its trackless paths_, _its
indescribable silence_.  _The curtain discovers_ MAH PHRU _and_ THE KING,
_who expresses his amazement at the loneliness and the poverty of her
lot_.  _She explains that poverty is not what frightens her_, _but the
enmity of those who live yonder_, _and who make it almost impossible for
her to sell her cucumbers or her pineapples_.  THE KING'S _gaze never
leaves the face or figure of the girl_.  _He declares that he will
protect her_--_that he will build her a home here in the shadow of the
loneliness around them_.  _He has two years of an unfettered
freedom_--_for those years he can command his life_.  _He loves her_, _he
desires her_--_they will find a Paradise together_.  _The girl trembles
with joy_--_with fear_--_with surprise_.  "And after two years?" _she
asks_.  "Death," _he answers_.




ACT II


SCENE I


_The jungle once more_.  _Time_: _noonday_.  _In place of the hut is a
building_, _half Burmese_, _half Italian villa_, _of white Chunam_, _with
curled roofs rising on roofs_, _gilded and adorned with spiral carvings
and a myriad golden and jewel-encrusted bells_.  _On the broad verandahs
are thrown Eastern carpets_, _rugs_, _embroideries_.

_The world is sun-soaked_.  _The surrounding trees stand sentinel-like in
the burning light_.  _Burmese servants squat motionless_, _smoking on the
broad white steps that lead from the house to the garden_.  _The crows
croak drowsily at intervals_.  _Parrots scream intermittently_.  _The
sound of a guitar playing a Venetian love-song can be heard coming from
the interior_.  _Otherwise life apparently sleeps_.  _Two elderly
retainers break the silence_.

"When will the Thakin tire of this?" _one asks the other in kindly
contempt_.

"The end is already at hand.  I read it at dawn to-day."

"Whence will it come?"

"I know not.  It is written that one heart will break."

"He will leave her?"

"He will leave her.  He will have no choice--who can war with Fate?"

_The sun shifts a little_; _a light breeze kisses the motionless palm
leaves_--_they quiver gracefully_.  _Attendants appear R. and L. bearing
a great Shamiana_ (_tent_), _silver poles_, _carved chairs_, _foot
supports_, _fruit_, _flowers_, _embroidered fans_.  _Three musicians in
semi-Venetian-Burmese costume follow with their instruments_.  _The tent
erected_, _enter_ (C.) MENG BENG _and_ MAH PHRU, _followed by two Burmese
women carrying two tiny children in Burmese fashion on their hips_.

_The servants retire to a distance_.  MENG BENG _and_ MAH PHRU _seat
themselves on carven chairs_; _the children are placed at their feet and
given coloured glass balls to play with_.  MENG BENG _and_ MAH PHRU _gaze
at them with deep affection and then at each other_.

_The musicians play light_, _zephyr-like airs_.  MENG BENG _and_ MAH PHRU
_talk together_.  MENG BENG _smokes a cigar_, MAH PHRU _has one of the
big yellow cheroots affected by Burmese women to-day_.

"It wants but two days to the two years," _he tells her sadly_.

"And you are happy?"

"As a god."

_She smiles radiantly_.  _She suspects nothing_.  _She is more beautiful
than before_.  _Her dress is of the richest Mandalay silks_.  _She wears
big nadoungs of rubies in her ears_.

_Presently_ MENG BENG _arranges a set of ivory chessmen on a low table
between them_.  _The sun sinks slowly_.  _The sound of approaching wheels
is heard_.

_Enter_ (_C._) U. RAI GYAN THOO, _preceded by two servants_.  MENG BENG
_looks up in surprise_--_in alarm_.  _He rises_, _etc._, _and goes
forward_.  U. RAI GYAN THOO _presents a letter written on palm leaves_.
MENG BENG _does not open it_.

_The curtains at the opening of the tent are_, _Oriental fashion_,
_dropped_.  _The music ceases_.

MENG BENG _and the_ GRAND VIZIER _converse apart_.  _The Minister
explains that the Princess of Ceylon's ship and its great convoy have
already been sighted_.  _The Court and city wait in eager expectancy_.
_The King has worshipped long enough at the Pagoda of Golden
Flowers_--_his subjects and his bride call to him_.  U. RAI GYAN THOO
_has come to take him to them_.

MENG BENG _is terribly distressed_.

"You can return one day," _the Vizier tells him_.  "The Pagoda will
remain.  I also, once, in years long dead, Lord of the Sea and Moon,
worshipped at a Pagoda."

MENG BENG _seeks_ MAH PHRU _to explain that he goes on urgent affairs_,
_that he will come back to her and to his sons_, _perhaps before the
waning of the new moon_.  _Their parting is sad with the pensive sadness
of look and gesture peculiar to Eastern people_.

MENG BENG _goes_ (C.) _with_ U. RAI GYAN THOO.  MAH PHRU _mounts to the
verandah to watch them go from behind the curtains_.  _Then_, _slowly
sinking across the heaped-up cushions_, _she faints_.

_The sun has set_.  _The music ceases_.  _The melancholy cry of the
peacocks fills the silence_.

ACT DROP




ACT III